Conversational AI as a Catalyst for Informal Learning: An Empirical Large-Scale
Study on LLM Use in Everyday Learning
NAÐA TERZIMEHIĆ, Technical University of Munich, Germany
BABETTE BÜHLER, Technical University of Munich, Germany
ENKELEJDA KASNECI, Technical University of Munich, Germany
Large language models have not only captivated the public imagination but have also sparked a profound rethinking of how we learn.

arXiv:2506.11789v1 [cs.HC] 13 Jun 2025

In the third year following the breakthrough launch of ChatGPT, everyday informal learning has been transformed as diverse user
groups explore these novel tools. Who is embracing LLMs for self-directed learning, and who remains hesitant? What are their reasons
for adoption or avoidance? What learning patterns emerge with this novel technological landscape? We present an in-depth analysis
from a large-scale survey of 776 participants, showcasing that 88% of our respondents already incorporate LLMs into their everyday
learning routines for a wide variety of (learning) tasks. Young adults are at the forefront of adopting LLMs, primarily to enhance
their learning experiences independently of time and space. Four types of learners emerge across learning contexts, depending on the
tasks they perform with LLMs and the devices they use to access them. Interestingly, our respondents exhibit paradoxical behaviours
regarding their trust in LLMs’ accuracy and privacy protection measures. Our implications emphasize the importance of including
different media types for learning, enabling collaborative learning, providing sources and meeting the needs of different types of
learners and learning by design.
CCS Concepts: • Human-centered computing → Human computer interaction (HCI).
Additional Key Words and Phrases: human computer interaction

1

Introduction

The mass adoption of large language models (LLMs), accelerated by the release of OpenAI’s ChatGPT in November ’22,
has captivated both the public and the research community ever since. ChatGPT and similar LLMs, such as Gemini,
Grok, DeepSeek, are capable of engaging in natural language dialogue and providing detailed responses across diverse
topics. Numerous thought pieces and research studies have addressed the impact of these novel tools in several areas of
our everyday lives, with remarkably education and learning being at the forefront of change [28, 38, 58].
Prior work in Human-Computer Interaction (HCI) and educational sciences highlights both the promises and
challenges of integrating AI into learning and education practices [38], with some researchers naming it a “double-edged
sword” for education [29]. On the one edge, LLM-driven assistants have demonstrated the potential for enhancing
learning engagement and effectiveness [12, 50], as well as facilitating personalized learning [12, 59, 80]. On the other
edge, concerns persist regarding over-reliance [14, 68], inaccuracies [79], biases [4, 48], or ethical issues [29, 38].
In light of LLMs’ recently emerging capabilities for reasoning and reflection [6], the impact of LLMs on learning bears
the potential to be far more groundbreaking than initially anticipated: learners now have a tailored, around-the-clock
learning assistant by their side [13, 39, 65], to assist them in a plethora of cognitive tasks. This presents an opportunity
to democratize learning and embed it into everyday life scenarios – i.e., everyday learning – be it informal learning as
day-to-day, often incidental learning; voluntary use in structured educational environments; or self-directed knowledge
acquisition outside of formal curricula [9, 63, 64] for both professional and personal growth.
Authors’ Contact Information: Nađa Terzimehić, Technical University of Munich, Munich, Germany, nadja.terzimehic@tum.de; Babette Bühler, Technical
University of Munich, Munich, Germany, babette.buehler@tum.de; Enkelejda Kasneci, Technical University of Munich, Munich, Germany, enkelejda.
kasneci@tum.de.
2025-06-16 01:11. Page 1 of 1–32.

1

2

Terzimehić et al.
Whereas the role of AI and, in particular, LLMs has been researched for formal education settings, informal learning

settings have received less attention, especially at scale. We believe this to be an opportune time to explore the actual use
of LLMs in informal contexts now that the initial hype and excitement around LLMs have settled. Prior research works
have explored the use and perceptions of LLMs in different learning settings, including a qualitative large-scale study
with early ChatGPT adopters across different disciplines and learning areas [29], a large-scale survey of researchers
using LLMs as research tools [46], investigations into the integration and use of LLMs within formal education by
students [72] or examinations into the usability of LLMs [67]. While these studies provide notable findings, they
predominantly focus on either qualitative insights or specialized user groups, leaving a gap in understanding the
broader population’s adoption and perception of LLMs for everyday learning at a large scale, particularly in informal
contexts where users voluntarily turn to LLMs for context-agnostic knowledge acquisition. This at-scale understanding
is important to rank current issues and benefits in order to provide a research agenda and actionable insights with the
aim of advancing the design and applicability of LLMs as informal learning assistants towards a universally accepted,
usable, and efficient learning tool.
We address the identified gap by means of the following four research questions:
RQ1. What demographic factors distinguish individuals who adopt LLMs for everyday learning from those
who do not?
RQ2. What key factors motivate or discourage individuals from using LLMs for everyday learning?
RQ3. What classes of LLM learners emerge regarding how, when, and in what contexts they integrate LLMs
into their everyday learning practices?
RQ4. What are the attitudes of the different LLM classes regarding the learning effectiveness of these tools,
their privacy implications, and the potential for overreliance in everyday learning?

As such, our goal is to complement the listed related works by providing a broad, comprehensive, mixed-method
inspection into LLM learners’ demographics, interaction patterns, and perceptions of LLM-based informal learning at
scale. To achieve this goal, we conducted a large-scale user survey over Prolific in February 2025 with 776 participants,
including non-LLM adopters, LLM-adopters (but no learners), and LLM learners. We report on descriptive and inferential
statistics between participants’ demographics, the learning patterns participants employ with LLMs in everyday informal
scenarios, and their diverse attitudes towards LLM learning at scale. To identify distinct learner profiles among LLM
learners, we conducted a latent class analysis based on self-reported LLM usage for learning. Our analysis focused on
uncovering unique patterns in the learning contexts where LLMs are employed, the specific tasks users perform, and
the devices they utilize for learning. Finally, we examined how learners’ attitudes regarding the tool’s effectiveness,
potential overreliance, and privacy implications in everyday learning scenarios relate to the identified learner types.
88% of participants adopted LLMs for learning. Learning adopters are younger, more educated, and predominantly
male. We found the main driver for adoption and intensity of LLM use to be curiosity and openness to new technologies.
On the other hand, the main barriers to adoption are mistrust in the accuracy and data handling of LLMs, as well as
satisfaction with traditional learning methods. However, for those who use and learn with LLMs, the ability to receive
personalized, on-demand support outweighed these concerns, with learners leveraging LLMs to enhance productivity
2025-06-16 01:11. Page 2 of 1–32.

An Empirical Large-Scale Study on LLM Use in Everyday Learning

3

and access just-in-time learning opportunities. We identified four distinct everyday learner profiles, namely Structured
Knowledge Builders, Self-Guided Explorers, Analytical Problem Solvers, and Adaptive Power Users. Each learning type
represents distinct patterns of engagement with LLMs – from academic knowledge building to informal, mobilefirst learning and broad, cross-contextual use. Ultimately, LLMs are becoming a central tool in everyday life and are
increasingly perceived as the new normal for improving learning and productivity.

Contribution Statement. We contribute with 1) an empirical account of how diverse demographic groups
and learning styles incorporate LLMs as informal learning aids, 2) a mixed-methods analysis of the benefits
and challenges of using LLMs for everyday learning, and 3) a set of actionable guidelines for designing and
implementing AI-powered tools to support informal learning.
2

Related Work

In this section, we review informal learning, the perception and integration of LLMs in educational settings, HCI
perspectives on conversational learning tools, and the challenges posed by these emerging technologies.
2.1

Informal and Everyday Learning

There are many definitions and understandings of informal learning [22], yet in its simplest form, it is learning that
rather happens in settings besides formal educational institutions (e.g., schools) [49, 52, 53, 63]. As two opposing ends
of a continuous learning spectrum [25], informal learning differs from formal education in several key ways. Unlike
formal education, informal learning is non-didactic, driven by the learner’s intrinsic motivation [63], and occurs in
environments where learning is not explicitly organized or assessed [51] but instead happens organically as part of daily
life [52], such as family interactions, work settings, and community engagements [9, 23, 63]. The process of informal
learning may involve self-directed, intentional learning, incidental learning, or socialization [64], being highly sensitive
to contextual factors [10, 25]. Some scholars argue that everyday learning, i.e., learning with a heightened awareness of
the surrounding context, coupled with a “culture of collaboration and trust”, can improve learning outcomes [53] – in
particular for adults, as unstructured learning forms, such as informal and everyday learning, become their prevalent
form of learning [49]. As AI and LLMs expand access to information in a more natural and everyday-fitting way, they
can help people transform virtually every moment into a learning opportunity with context-appropriate timing and
content. Unlike traditional search engines, which require learners to sift through and interpret multiple sources, LLMs
can act as personal tutors that, e.g., explain complex concepts, adapt to the learner’s prior knowledge, or answer specific
questions in a conversational way. In this context, our work seeks to understand how modern LLMs contribute to this
everyday learning process and where they might fill gaps left by current (or traditional) analogue and digital methods.
2.2

Demographical Differences in LLM Use

Large language models are used differently by individuals with different demographic characteristics, such as age,
gender, educational background and personality traits[36]. Younger individuals are more keen to adopt and use LLMs
[37, 69], with those of high levels of agreeableness tending to have more positive views of LLMs, while older individuals
often exhibit more skepticism [69]. Furthermore, a clear gender gap exists in LLM adoption, with male users significantly
outnumbering female users, both 4 months after the release of ChatGPT in November 2022 [19], as well as 30 months
2025-06-16 01:11. Page 3 of 1–32.

4

Terzimehić et al.

after[72]. This gap is particularly pronounced among younger age groups and diminishes as individuals age [19],
with male users also reporting a higher frequency of LLM use compared to their female counterparts [19, 72]. Similar
numbers run for revisiting ChatGPT-generated content [72]. Among the group of researchers, women and non-binary
researchers, along with those with more years of research experience, often express greater ethical concerns about
LLMs [55]. However, Draxler et al. [19] report the gender effect in general to be less pronounced among those who
possess technical degrees.
LLM usage patterns also vary by expertise, with professionals and experts more likely to use LLMs for complex
tasks such as writing formal texts or coding, while novices often explore the tool for entertainment or casual learning.
Non-users often cite a lack of knowledge, ethical concerns, and the impersonal nature of LLM interactions as reasons
for not adopting these tools [19].
In addition to gender, age, and expertise, other demographic factors such as race and nationality also influence LLM
usage. Junior researchers and those who are non-White or non-native English speakers tend to use LLMs more frequently
and report higher perceived benefits and lower risks [46]. As a consequence, LLMs can help address structural barriers
faced by these groups in research, potentially promoting greater equity in academic environments [46]. Furthermore,
researchers in computer science show greater comfort with disclosing their use of LLMs and express fewer ethical
concerns compared to those in other disciplines [46], suggesting disciplinary disparities in LLM adoption.
However, there remains a gap in understanding how LLMs influence informal and everyday learning experiences
across different demographic groups. We thus conducted a large-scale survey to capture insights from general-public
learners, aiming to uncover the distinct and potentially varying effects of LLMs on learners’ everyday learning habits.

2.3

LLMs for Learning

2.3.1 Early Perceptions. A recent HCI review Pang et al. [58] found that 15% of the manuscripts published at CHI, which
are focused on LLMs, are centred on education. The interest in the influence of LLMs on education was indeed sparked
early on. After the immediate release of ChatGPT, many scholars provided discussions reflected on the opportunities
and challenges of LLMs both in general, as well as specifically in education and learning. Dwivedi et al. [20] and Bahrini
et al. [3] synthesize the existing narrative to highlight both the potential and threats of generative AI (GenAI), such as
ChatGPT. As such, LLMs can enhance productivity across multiple sectors, such as business, healthcare, or science [3],
with in particular education and learning to “experience some of the most transformative impacts” [20]. Dwivedi et al. [20]
further emphasize biases, outdated training data, and misinformation as threats. Kasneci et al. [38] in particular focused
on the field of education, addressing both student and teacher perspectives on the opportunities and challenges of LLMs.
In their opinion, students across all phases of education and learning (including informal and professional learning)
can benefit from (personalized) assistance in writing, understanding complex concepts, encouraging critical-thinking
and reflection skills, or developing certain language skills, among others. Yet, the authors argue that LLMs pose a
series of challenges: copyright, overreliance, response shallowness, bias, privacy or data fabrication, and sustainability
are among the high-profile ones. Lin [47] discussed ChatGPT’s role in self-guided learning environments, listing its
potential as a digital learning process companion for adult learners, though several concerns about over-dependence,
unclear AI usage policies, and data updates to reduce incorrect outputs were raised. As LLMs evolve and transform into
large reasoning models (LRMs), we can anticipate the emergence of more powerful capabilities such as self-reflection,
along with more potential harms such as manipulation and hacking [6].
2025-06-16 01:11. Page 4 of 1–32.

An Empirical Large-Scale Study on LLM Use in Everyday Learning

5

2.3.2 Early Adopters. Following the initial boom of LLMs, several studies have emerged examining their ongoing use
with early adopters and their potential implications in education and learning. Three months after the ChatGPT release,
Hosseini et al. [34] found that 40% of their 420 participants had interacted with ChatGPT. Participants found research to
profit more from LLMs than the fields of education or healthcare, citing a lack of depth and critical reasoning in medical
education as the main challenge of ChatGPT. Skjuve et al. [67] ran a qualitative questionnaire study among 194 early
adopters about good and bad user experiences with ChatGPT. Their results reveal high pragmatic (e.g., helpful and
comprehensive information, task simplification) and hedonic attributes (e.g., the “wow-factor”, entertainment, creativity)
even in the early distribution stages of ChatGPT. Yet, the authors highlight the issue of LLMs being “convincingly wrong”
as a critical challenge that HCI must address in order to ensure more reliable and positive future use. Albadarin et al.
[2] conduct a systematic literature review of 14 early empirical studies (50% qualitative, 20% quantitative, and 29%
mixed-methods, with only two studies exceeding the participants’ count of 100) to synthesize ChatGPT use patterns
in educational settings. Negative consequences include risks such as misinformation, the digital divide, academic
dishonesty, and, in extreme cases, manipulation. In the context of learning, these issues primarily manifest as a decline
in critical thinking and problem-solving skills, along with reduced engagement in deep learning. The review also
highlights that the use of ChatGPT worsens the lack of meaningful social interaction in group learning settings. On a
more positive note, the authors highlight several beneficial ways in which students, particularly in higher education,
utilize ChatGPT: as a writing and language support tool, a virtual on-demand assistant, an enhancer of self-directed
learning, and a facilitator of complex concepts.
In contrast to categorizing ChatGPT by learning tasks, Stojanov et al. [70] analyzed the types of learners, or reliers,
that emerge from relying on ChatGPT across 13 learning tasks. The study’s analysis of 490 students resulted in five
relier types: almost 40% were versatile low reliers with minimal dependence on the tool’s various tasks; 16.5% were
knowledge seekers, employing ChatGPT for content acquisition and summarization; 11.8% were proactive learners relying
for feedback and planning; and 23.1% were assignment delegators who used it for drafting assignments and homework.
Tlili et al. [76] qualitatively examined the use of ChatGPT in three waves – a social media posts’ analysis, interviews, and
a UX study – revealing initial optimism about ChatGPT in the space of social media with a grain of caution reported by
some users. The further two study waves confirmed the dichotomy of perceptions around ChatGPT, framing ChatGPT
as “devil and angel” in education. Similarly, Fütterer et al. [26] discuss findings from a social media analysis on both the
global, general acceptance, as well as the acceptance in education, of early ChatGPT users – unfolding mixed sentiments
regarding education. A further social media analysis [29] related specifically to educational contexts revealed that
ChatGPT’s role spans various educational contexts, including content creation in higher education, language learning
in K-12, or problem-solving assistance in practical skills training. Despite the dominantly positive view among adult
professionals, the study found that negative concerns, such as academic dishonesty, misinformation, and privacy issues,
to be in particular relevance for K-12 and higher education contexts. In terms of specifically student use in higher
education, Niloy et al. [56] identified several factors influencing the use of ChatGPT in higher education. The study
found that factors such as ease of access, time-saving benefits, content inseparability, aided learning, and cognitive
miserliness significantly influenced students’ intention to use ChatGPT – at the same time contradicting previous
research works (e.g., [20]) by showing that technical knowledge of ChatGPT had no significant impact. Chan and
Zhou [11] also examined the relationship between student perceptions and their intention to use GenAI, finding that
perceived value had a strong positive correlation with usage intentions, while perceived cost had a weak negative
correlation. In contrast, a recent user survey [1] on 366 students’ perceptions of GenAI suggested that knowledge on
both the benefits and limitations of LLMs positively correlates with students’ willingness to use GenAI in education.
2025-06-16 01:11. Page 5 of 1–32.

6

Terzimehić et al.

In a comparative study of students from pure and applied science fields, Qu et al. [61] found that students in applied
academic disciplines (i.e., engineering and science students) had greater knowledge and adoption willingness of GenAI,
particularly for cognitively demanding tasks.
2.3.3 Interaction Patterns of LLM Adopters. Regarding concrete uses of ChatGPT in self-directed learning for writing, a
recent user study with 384 students found that postsecondary students primarily used ChatGPT for brainstorming
and idea generation in writing tasks [77]. The study identified a use trajectory where students, initially motivated
by curiosity or the need to complete tasks, continue using the tool due to the perceived task-benefits gained from
their initial experiences, with the tasks including writing capabilities, information variety, or perceived usefulness,
among others [75]. A further large-scale user survey [71] with 534 students revealed that established routines, perceived
performance enhancement, and hedonic motivation are among the main drivers of ChatGPT use intention.
In the study by Wang et al. [77], participants reported a strong sense of responsibility for their learning by crosschecking the output generated by ChatGPT. Ultimately, participants were divided on whether using ChatGPT improved
their writing skills: some felt encouraged to practice writing and revising more frequently, while others felt the need for
longer use to make an informed judgment. Similarly, for the task of writing, Punar Özçelik and Yangın Ekşi [60] found
that, in a much smaller sample of 11 participants, ChatGPT is an effective tool for helping students to develop their
formal writing skills, particularly with regard to self-editing. However, they highlight the need for further functional
improvements to enhance ChatGPT’s effectiveness.
To understand concrete use patterns of how and how much students use LLMs, Sublime and Renna [72] surveyed
395 students from as early as 13 years of age to university level, further investigating the influence of demographic
differences on usage patterns. The same study investigates non-adopters too, aiming to illuminate their reasons for
non-use. The study revealed a number of interesting findings. First and foremost, LLMs have reached an audience
of at least 70% across all examined age groups and education levels, with an increasing use the further students are
in their education level. Students reach hand to LLMs mostly on their computers and smartphones, and report high
satisfaction with the output of LLMs. 2/3 of students aged between 13 and 16 use LLMs, however, only 20% revise
the output. This fraction increases with the age of students (up to 50%). The authors thus highlight the necessity of
teaching critical evaluation and reflection on the output the AI generates – a skill older students in their participants’
possessed, probably due to the lack of availability of AI in their formative educational years. Non-users made up 13% of
the sample of participants, with perceived inappropriateness and academic honesty cited as the most common reasons
for avoidance. Students reported using ChatGPT additionally for document writing (nearly 75% of its usage).
Informal and implicit learning in the workplace has been recognized as a key factor in professional development
and the work environment [21]. Focusing on researchers and academics, Liao et al. [46] conducted a survey with
816 participants to explore current usage patterns of LLMs in their work pipeline, as well as their perceptions of
the risks, benefits, acceptability, and demographic differences related to LLM use in research. Their findings indicate
that 81% of researchers have already integrated LLMs into some part of their workflow, primarily for tasks related
to paper preparation. The most common uses include information seeking (e.g., discovering related papers or topics,
aiding in summarization and explanations, or answering factual questions) and editing. Additionally, computer science
researchers are more open about disclosing their use of LLMs, expressing fewer ethical concerns. This trend is also
observed among non-white, non-native English speakers. In general, the issue (or opportunity) of equity emerged as a
significant topic of discussion among the study’s participants. Moreover, participants were more concerned about the
LLM use of others than their own, indicating a “third-person effect” [15].
2025-06-16 01:11. Page 6 of 1–32.

An Empirical Large-Scale Study on LLM Use in Everyday Learning

7

Research Gap. Unlike most of the studies listed, our work focuses on the active, real-world use of LLMs in
informal, everyday learning at scale. We aim to gather insights from a broad and diverse range of users, without
imposing any specific recruitment criteria (e.g., profession, age, or gender), drawing from their lived experiences
since the widespread release of LLMs in November 2022. Our research is guided by key questions about who is
using LLMs, when and where they are being used, how they are being applied, and what is being learned in these
everyday contexts. Additionally, we cross-examine these experiences with participants’ perceptions of how LLMs
have impacted their learning habits, particularly in terms of learning efficiency, reliance on LLMs, and privacy
concerns.

3
3.1

Methodology
Survey Design

Our survey was developed using an approach that integrated an examination of current scientific literature, triangulated
with a GPT-generated questionnaire draft. We began by reviewing existing literature on the role and use of LLMs
and similar AI tools in education and learning. This initial step allowed us to identify several key constructs, such
as the general and specifically learning tasks performed with LLMs (e.g., [7, 70]), the diverse learning contexts in
which these models are used (e.g., [29]) or the benefits and drawbacks of employing LLMs(e.g., [67] and specifically for
learning [29]). Our objective was to complement the listed works’ findings by quantifying these qualitatively established
constructs through our survey with the general public. Inspired by the more recent work of Sublime and Renna [72], we
employed branching logic to include questions about general LLM non-use and non-use specifically in the domain of
learning. In these branches, we were interested in reasons for non-use and the demographic attributes of non LLM users.
Our review of related literature also revealed additional constructs emerging from actual LLM usage, that is, beyond
initial (hypothetical) perceptions around LLMs. Consequently, we added items addressing the interaction modalities
employed with LLMs, the device and time context of LLM use, payment for LLM services (informed by frameworks
such as those in [30, 31]), changes in learning habits and perceived learning effectiveness, as well as implemented
privacy measures and (over-)reliance effects [32] of LLMs on learning. With the built knowledge of existing and missing
constructs in the literature, we prompted ChatGPT to create an initial draft of a questionnaire to examine “who uses
how LLMs for educative and learning purposes” in January 2025. We subsequently refined the prompt to add questions
on the identified missing constructs. We curated the resulting question set and answer options in several waves, based
on existing literature and pilot testing, with emphasis on the categorical multiple-choice answer options. As a result
of the described approach, the survey first assessed participants’ prior engagement with AI tools and multimodal
LLMs by asking them to indicate which LLM tools they had used. Those who had never used such tools were routed
to blocks exploring reasons for non-use, while LLM users answered follow-up items on interaction modalities (e.g.,
text-to-text, image-to-text) and LLM payment options. LLM users were then asked whether they use LLMs for learning,
too – if not, the survey listed multiple options to choose from as reasons not to use LLMs for learning. Otherwise, the
survey branched to specific tasks performed with LLMs for learning. The survey then probed the learning contexts
in which LLMs are applied (from [29]), capturing the frequency and duration of use (adapted from [73]), triggers for
adoption, devices and platforms, social settings of use as well as the range of inquiries [7] and learning tasks (such as
seeking factual information, brainstorming, and problem-solving, compiled from [46, 70, 72]) through both categorical
and continuous measures. Respondents’ perceptions of the benefits and drawbacks of using LLMs for learning were
2025-06-16 01:11. Page 7 of 1–32.

8

Terzimehić et al.

evaluated with a set of multiple-choice questions, followed by Likert-scale items focusing on the LLM’s critical thinking
impacts and over-reliance, and challenges such as misinformation or usability issues. The survey also explored changes
in learning habits and data privacy concerns to contextualize the impact of LLMs on everyday learning practices. To
conclude the section on the use of LLMs for learning, the questionnaire explored potential improvements for LLMs in
educational contexts and assessed participants’ willingness to recommend them to others.
Finally, for a more comprehensive demographic analysis, we included five single-choice questions on AI literacy [33]
that assessed participants’ understanding of AI functionalities and limitations, the Affinity for Technology Interaction
(ATI) scale[74], and a short Big-5 personality questionnaire [62].
3.2

Procedure & Participants

We implemented the questionnaire using Qualtrics and recruited participants from Germany using Prolific1 in several
batches during the month of February 2025. The recruitment text stated that we are looking into how “multimodal large
language models (LLMs) [are used] in your everyday life for learning and productivity. Even if you do not use LLMs, for
learning or in general, we would still be interested to hear your reasons for not using them.”
Participants had to possess fluent English skills. Besides an equal gender distribution, no other screening criteria
were employed. This was to ensure a wide range of participants’ attributes. The questionnaire began by listing the
GDPR-conform consent form to which participants had to agree in order to continue with the questionnaire.
818 participants started the questionnaire beyond the consent point, with 801 participants completing it within the
designated time of 55 minutes. We excluded 25 participants after data inspection, as these have failed our attention
check: these participants selected certain tasks to be completed with LLMs, with at least one task’s frequency later
specified as ’never used’. Our final participants’ pool thus consists of 𝑛 = 776 participants, aged 31.6 years on average
(𝑆𝐷 = 9.87, 𝑚𝑎𝑥 = 72). The gender distribution of the participants was nearly balanced, with males representing 49.9%,
females 48.5%, and non-binary participants making up 1%. Participants needed on average 19.74 minutes (𝑆𝐷 = 11.56)
to fill out the questionnaire. and received monetary compensation (12.82EUR/hour) via the platform after finishing.
3.3

Analysis

3.3.1 Latent Class Analysis. To identify distinct learner profiles based on their interaction patterns with LLMs, we
employed latent class analysis (LCA), a probabilistic modeling approach that identifies unobserved (latent) subgroups
within a population based on patterns in categorical variables. LCA assumes that an underlying latent categorical
variable accounts for the associations among observed variables, grouping individuals into discrete and mutually
exclusive classes that share similar response patterns.
In this study, we applied LCA to three key dimensions of learning behavior: devices used (e.g., desktop, laptop,
smartphone, tablet), learning contexts (e.g., higher education, K–12, lifelong learning, professional development), and
learning tasks (e.g., brainstorming, coding assistance, feedback seeking). Each of these categorical variables served as an
indicator in the LCA model, allowing us to uncover latent learner profiles based on their behavioral patterns.
To determine the optimal number of latent classes, we fitted models with varying numbers of classes and evaluated
model fit using two widely used information criteria: the Bayesian Information Criterion (BIC) and the Akaike Information Criterion (AIC). Both metrics penalize model complexity to prevent overfitting, with lower values indicating
better model fit as depicted in Figure B. Based on these criteria, a four-class solution provided the best balance between
1 www.prolific.com [date accessed: 2025–06–16]

2025-06-16 01:11. Page 8 of 1–32.

An Empirical Large-Scale Study on LLM Use in Everyday Learning

9

explanatory power and parsimony, suggesting the existence of four distinct learner profiles. LCA was conducted
using the poLCA package in R, which estimates model parameters using an expectation-maximization (EM) algorithm
combined with Newton-Raphson optimization. The resulting class-specific conditional probabilities were examined to
interpret the distinct behavioral patterns associated with each class.
4

Results

We present our findings organized around the four research questions. To address RQ1, we first examine demographic
differences by dividing our participants’ pool of 776 individuals into three groups based on LLM usage for learning, that
we further address as:

Non-LLM Users. 15 respondents (about 2%) have never used any LLM or similar AI tool.
Non-LLM Learners. 83 respondents (11%) have used LLMs but not for everyday learning purposes.
LLM Learners. 678 respondents (87%) have incorporated LLMs into their everyday learning practices.

With this grouping, we make descriptive and inferential comparisons between those who adopt LLMs for learning
versus those who avoid them (RQ1). We then perform a mixed-method analysis of triggers and hindrances for LLM
adoption for learning to investigate RQ2. To address RQ3, we conduct an LCA among those who adopt LLMs for learning
to uncover underlying patterns in timing, context, and manner of LLM usage for day-to-day learning. Concluding with
RQ4, we run several regression tests to show how the resulting learner profiles stand in relation to perceived attitudes
of effectiveness, reliance, and privacy with LLM use. We accompany these results with a qualitative analysis of the
answer set on how LLMs changed participants’ approaches and habits with learning.
4.1

RQ1: Demographic Differences

Our analysis reveals several demographic trends between the three groups of participants.
Age. LLM learners tend to be younger on average (𝑀 = 31, 𝑆𝐷 = 9.57), whereas those who did not use LLMs for
learning were older (𝑀 = 35, 𝑆𝐷 = 11) on average, see Figure 1a. An ANOVA test confirmed a significant difference in
age (𝐹 = 6.68, 𝑝 < 0.01). In particular, the LLM learners were significantly younger than the group who use LLMs (but
not for learning, 𝑝 = 0.004).
Gender. Among LLM learners, 53% participants were male (𝑛 = 358) and 46% (𝑛 = 313) female (see Figure 1b), whereas
in the group that avoided using LLMs for learning, women formed a majority with 64% (𝑛 = 53 female, 𝑛 = 25 male). A
chi-square test found this difference significant ( 𝜒˜ 2 = 15.5, 𝑝 < 0.001), meaning that men in our participants’ sample
were more likely to embrace LLMs as learning tools than women.
Education Level. Educational attainment was relatively high overall, but non-LLM users had lower education levels
on average (albeit not siginificant). 40% of non-users (𝑛 = 6) hold at least a bachelor’s degree, compared to 57–61%
(𝑛 = 386 and 𝑛 = 51) of those who use LLMs (with or without learning, respectively).
2025-06-16 01:11. Page 9 of 1–32.

10

Terzimehić et al.

*

*

70

Years

60
50
40
30
20
All

Non-LLM Users

Non-LLM Learners

LLM Learners

(a) Age Distribution

(b) Gender Distribution

Fig. 1. Demographic distributions: (a) age and (b) gender

Income. LLM learners were distributed across income levels, while non-users clustered in lower incomes. About 87%
(𝑛 = 13) of non-users earned below EUR50K/year versus 53% (𝑛 = 407) of LLM users (learning or not) in that range. We
observed more high-income individuals among learning-adopters – nearly 10% (𝑛 = 67) of them had incomes greater
than EUR100K, whereas none of the non-users did. Nonetheless, adoption was not limited to any one income bracket;
even within lower income groups, many participants were using LLMs for learning, as depicted in Figure 2a.

(a) Income Comparison

(b) Educational Degree Comparison

Fig. 2. Demographic distributions: (a) income and (b) education level

Technology Attitudes. We measured an AI Literacy score by means of five multiple-choice questions (single correct
answer, score 0 to 5) from [33], next to the technology affinity score measured by [74].
Even those who have not adopted LLMs are reasonably aware of AI basics, as AI literacy scores did not differ strongly
between groups (𝑥˜ = 3 and 𝑥˜ = 3.2 for LLM learners and non-LLM learners, respectively, vs 𝑥˜ = 2.87 for non-LLM users).
Attitude toward technology, however, did differ: LLM-learners scored highest on the ATI scale (𝑀 = 3.92. 𝑆𝐷 = 0.55,
𝛼 = 0.71 out of 5), significantly above those who avoided using LLMs (𝑝 < 0.01), as per Figure 3a.
Big-5 Personality. Personality factors did not show large differences between groups, although non-users trended
slightly higher on neuroticism and lower on agreeableness (likely due to the small non-user sample, these differences
were not statistically significant), as depicted in Figure 3b.
2025-06-16 01:11. Page 10 of 1–32.

An Empirical Large-Scale Study on LLM Use in Everyday Learning

(a) ATI Score Distribution

11

(b) Personality Distribution

Fig. 3. Distributions of ATI scores and personality traits: (a) ATI score distribution, (b) big-5 personality distribution

RQ1 Main Findings. According to our findings, the adoption of LLMs for learning has reached a broad
proportion of 88% in our sample. Statistically, we found significant differences in age and gender distributions
between LLM learners and non-LLM learners, as well as in tech attitude scores. Education and income showed
observable trends (learners skewing higher) though the group differences were less stark after excluding the very
small non-user group. These patterns reinforce that early adopters of LLMs for learning look similar to early
adopters of other tech [8] – younger, educated, and male-skewed.

4.2

RQ2: Discouraging and Motivating Factors to Use LLMs for Everyday Learning

Discouraging Factors and Challenges. The primary reason for LLM avoidance reported by the non-LLM users group
pertains to mistrust (𝑛 = 6, 40%) in the factual output of LLMs. 13% (𝑛 = 2) of participants mentioned concerns regarding
the handling of data (privacy) during the training process. Ethical considerations also play a role (“It feels like cheating”),
with some participants expressing concerns about the environmental impact of LLMs (𝑛 = 2), while others express
reservations about excessive reliance on AI tools (𝑛 = 2). One participant articulated their concerns with the prospect
of not wanting to become “lazy”. Additionally, two participants felt unable to utilize LLMs effectively.
We further inquired with the group of non-LLM learners about their reasons for avoiding LLMs, which are more
tailored to the use case of learning. Participants were permitted to select multiple reasons. These reasons exhibit overlap
with those previously cited by non-LLM users. The predominant concerns (𝑛 = 52) revolve around the reliability of
factual output, ethical concerns (𝑛 = 25) and data privacy (𝑛 = 19).
Conversely, 52% non-LLM learners expressed a preference for traditional learning methods (𝑛 = 44). Whereas almost
a quarter (𝑛 = 20) of participants cited a lack of motivation, one eight (𝑛 = 12) of non-LLM learners indicated a perceived
lack of skills necessary to effectively utilize LLMs for learning purposes. Notably, only two participants cited a strict
prohibition by their educational institutions as a deterrent. The majority of non-LLM learners appear to adhere firmly
2025-06-16 01:11. Page 11 of 1–32.

12

Terzimehić et al.

(a) Challenges

(b) Benefits

Fig. 4. Proportion of reported (a) challenges and (b) benefits experienced by learners when using LLMs for learning

to their stated positions of not using LLMs for learning, as 61% (𝑛 = 51) indicated that they have no intention of using
LLMs for learning in the future, with 19% (𝑛 = 16) participants expressing some degree of hesitation.
Among the potential factors that might encourage non-LLM learners to utilize LLMs for learning purposes, the
responses were distributed between improved accuracy (𝑛 = 35) and recommendations from AI experts and educators
(𝑛 = 23). Yet, a quarter (𝑛 = 21) each selected “nothing” and “I stand firmly in not using LLMs for learning.”
LLM learners could specify challenges they face when learning with LLMs from a multiple-choice list. As Figure 4a
depicts, the most commonly selected challenge when interacting with LLMs was misinformation (𝑛 = 460), accounting
for 68% of respondents. The second most frequent issue was irrelevant or useless output (𝑛 = 422, participants or 62%).
Bias in AI-generated responses was noted in 29% of cases (𝑛 = 196), reflecting concerns about fairness and neutrality in
AI outputs. Additionally, technical issues, such as system errors or response failures, affected 26% (𝑛 = 176). Ethical
concerns were raised by 18% (𝑛 = 121), followed by 15% (𝑛 = 104) of LLM learners encountering instances where the
language model was unwilling to provide an answer. The clarity of AI-generated output was selected in 12% (𝑛 = 82),
with participants finding responses difficult to understand. Moreover, 9% (𝑛 = 82) mentioned experiencing complex
user interactions, possibly indicating difficulties in effectively communicating with the model. Interestingly, 7% (𝑛 = 47)
stated not experiencing any challenges and 3% (𝑛 = 23) reported facing other challenges that were not captured in the
predefined categories.
Motivating Factors and Benefits. We surveyed the LLM learners’ group to list the motivating factors behind their
adoption of these technologies. As per Figure 4b, the major motivating factor listed was curiosity (𝑛 = 517), followed
by recommendations from social connections (𝑛 = 254). In a similar vein, media coverage or news about LLMs was a
trigger for 217 participants. In 157 cases, the educational institution or employer encouraged using LLMs for learning.
85 participants shared how their use of LLMs for learning has changed over time and what makes them continue to
use them. Many participants stated starting out of curiosity, which grew over time into exploring various capabilities of
AI, which for some, led to increased prompting knowledge and knowledge on how LLMs operate in general: “I think
they keep getting better and faster. I also have learned to use prompts better, so maybe that also helps.” Some participants
were able to tunnel its use for “very specific tasks” – others observe how the use of LLMs has spilled over into other
various contexts of work and everyday chores: “First, I only learned for school, now I use it in my everyday life as well.”
2025-06-16 01:11. Page 12 of 1–32.

An Empirical Large-Scale Study on LLM Use in Everyday Learning

13

We finally asked LLM learners to share their thoughts on the benefits of using LLMs for learning. Again, participants
could choose from a multiple-choice list. The two top benefits revolve around access, responsiveness, and flexibility in
unconstrained use: instant access to information emerged as the most widely recognized benefit (𝑛 = 567, 83.63% of
LLM learners), closely followed by LLMs being available 24/7 (𝑛 = 530, 78.17%). 59.4% and 48% of participants felt that
LLMs were able to clarify difficult concepts quickly, at times with tailored explanations, respectively. Whereas a little
more than half (𝑛 = 357) of the participants stated to have experienced improved productivity, almost a third (𝑛 = 201)
experienced improved engagement in learning thanks to LLM use. Finally, 46.3% (𝑛 = 314) and 43.3% (𝑛 = 294) reported
LLMs being efficient in generating new ideas and being helpful in reducing learning time, respectively.

RQ2 Main Findings. The primary barriers keeping people from using LLMs for learning are lack of trust
in the output accuracy and data handling of AI, as well as satisfaction with traditional learning methods –
essentially, “Why use this if I cannot fully trust it and I am doing fine with Google/books/teachers?”
Interestingly, the same concern of mistrust tops the chart of challenges among LLM learners, with their
experiences showing that most have indeed encountered incorrect answers provided by the LLMs. Another insight
is that some avoiders simply do not know how to fit AI into their learning, next to being concerned about the
(non)ethical use of not becoming over-reliant or misusing AI in academic settings.
LLM learners emphasize the ability to get personalized explanations on any topic at any time. This lowers the
barrier to entry for exploring new topics, given that curiosity was the biggest adoption driver. It’s like having a
tutor on call, albeit one that sometimes lies to you. For this group, the benefits clearly outweigh the challenges of
LLMs.
4.3

RQ3: Learning Tasks and Contexts

For the 678 participants actively using LLMs in their learning, we explored which LLMs and their modalities they turn
to for learning, next to what tasks they use LLMs for. Unsurprisingly, ChatGPT is by far the most commonly used LLM,
with participants relying strongly on the text-to-text modality for a wide variety of tasks.
Subsequently, we explore the when, where, and how these tools fit into participants’ daily learning routines. The
picture that emerges is one of flexible, self-directed usage: people integrate LLM assistance whenever they need it,
largely on personal devices, and mostly on their own (i.e., not in groups). Below, we first break down the task usage
patterns, followed by context patterns. We then describe the four distinct learner profiles identified by LCA.
4.3.1

The What of Everyday Learning with LLMs.

Which LLMs? The median amount, per participant, of LLMs used for learning is one (𝑀 = 1.38, 𝑆𝐷 = 0.72, 𝑚𝑎𝑥 = 6).
Among the chatbots used for learning, OpenAI ChatGPT was by far the most frequently mentioned, with 93% (𝑛 = 632)
of LLM learners reporting its use. Google Gemini (𝑛 = 86), Microsoft Copilot (𝑛 = 81), and DeepSeek (𝑛 = 64) follow
next. A little less than 5% (𝑛 = 33) reported using LLMs outside of these platforms, such as Perplexity, Claude or Grok.
Inquiries and Learning Tasks. We asked participants to share which inquiries they pursue with LLMs, guided by the
inquiry taxonomy by [7]. This taxonomy encompasses 24 inquiries that evolve not only around learning tasks, but also
self-reflective or artistic practices, among others.
2025-06-16 01:11. Page 13 of 1–32.

14

Terzimehić et al.
Participants reported conducting an average of 7.53 different inquiries (𝑆𝐷 = 4.40) with LLMs, with the inquiry

variance per person ranging from 1 to 24 (𝑥˜ = 7). This indicates a wide variability and understanding of the inquiries
individuals pose with LLMs for daily learning-related activities.
The most frequently performed tasks were Explanatory Inquiries (𝑛 = 471, 69.5%), Factual Queries (𝑛 = 429, 63.3%),
and Tutorial Requests (𝑛 = 414, 61%). These point to learners relying on LLMs for gaining explanations, retrieving factual
information, and following step-by-step instructions. Next come Idea Generation (𝑛 = 377, 55.6%) and Troubleshooting
Assistance (𝑛 = 336, 49.6%), indicating that LLMs play a role in creativity and problem-solving. Other frequently
reported tasks included Learning Support (𝑛 = 322, 47.5%), Content Creation (𝑛 = 272, 40.1%), and Technical Guidance
(𝑛 = 258, 38%). Less frequently mentioned (but still notable) were tasks related to Decision Support (𝑛 = 231, 34%), Skill
Development (𝑛 = 231, 34%), Planning and Organization (𝑛 = 226, 33.3%), and Data Processing (𝑛 = 219, 32.3%). Personal
and professional guidance, such as Personal Advice (𝑛 = 194) and Business and Career Advice (𝑛 = 121) were mentioned
by 28.6% and 17.85% of LLM learners, respectively. Service Utilization (𝑛 = 161) was reported by 23.75% LLM learners.
Other inquiries were mentioned by less than 20% of LLM learners, as per Figure 5.

Fig. 5. Frequency of mentioned inquiries

Following this, we zoomed into the learning scenario and inquired about the learning tasks participants complete
with the assistance of LLMs, presenting them with a multiple-choice list of options. Participants could then report the
frequency of use for each selected task on a scale from Less than once a month to Every day.
Participants engage with LLMs for a wide range of learning tasks. On average, participants report using LLMs for 7
different tasks (𝑀 = 6.99, 𝑆𝐷 = 3.42). However, the distribution is broad, with some individuals using LLMs for as few
as one task, while others engage in up to 17 different tasks (𝑥˜ = 6).
As presented in Figure 6, learning tasks related to content summarization, concept explanation, and factual information
retrieval are among the most frequently performed, with many participants engaging in these activities at least weekly.
Brainstorming, problem-solving, and text-related tasks (translation, paraphrasing, and grammar checking) also see
frequent usage, though with greater variation: while some learners use LLMs regularly, others engage with these tasks
2025-06-16 01:11. Page 14 of 1–32.

An Empirical Large-Scale Study on LLM Use in Everyday Learning

15

Fig. 6. Frequency of the learning tasks participants perform with LLMs

only occasionally or monthly. More specialized tasks, such as coding assistance, data analysis, and quiz design, are
performed less frequently, with most users engaging less than once a month or only on an as-needed basis. Clarifying
assignments and searching for additional resources are also among the less frequent use cases.
Interaction Modalities. Today’s LLMs are multimodal, accepting images or audio files besides text, too, so we asked
which interaction modalities users employ. Virtually all learning-users (97.3%) use text-to-text interaction, that is, typing
text questions and reading text answers. This is followed by using images as part of the LLM-supported learning process:
either by asking the AI to interpret or describe images (i.e., image-to-text, 𝑛 = 193) or by generating images from text
prompts (i.e., text-to-image, 𝑛 = 145). Some participants indicated using voice interfaces to converse with the LLM,
either with voice input (speech-to-text, 𝑛 = 113) or having the LLM answer with speech (text-to-speech, 𝑛 = 74). Far
fewer have ventured into video-to-text (𝑛 = 29) or text-to-video (𝑛 = 21) interaction.
4.3.2

The When, Where, and How of Everyday Learning with LLMs.

Duration & Frequency. 63.5% of participants utilize LLMs for a duration exceeding six months: 34.4% (𝑛 = 233)
engaging for more than a year and 29.2% (𝑛 = 198) for a period between six months and a year. In contrast, only 4.6%
(𝑛 = 31) of participants reported utilizing LLMs for less than one month. The median self-reported time of use was 20
minutes per week spent interacting with LLMs for learning tasks (𝑀 = 47.2 min/week, 𝑆𝐷 = 80.36 with some heavy
users spending many hours 𝑚𝑎𝑥 = 900). 20% (𝑛 = 137) of LLM learners stated using LLMs every day for learning for at
least one task with LLMs (more on tasks in Section 4.3.1). Most participants however, almost 60% (𝑛 = 406), use LLMs at
least once a week (but not daily). Less than 3% (𝑛 = 18) of participants use LLMs exclusively less than once a month.
Timing. Most LLM learners do not reserve a special time or day for LLM-based learning, that is, they use it whenever
the need pops up. Nearly 70% (𝑛 = 471) selected no particular day of the week for using LLMs, and about 51% (𝑛 = 345)
no particular time of day. Among those LLM learners who did specify timing, weekday evenings and afternoons were
a bit more common (see Figure 7): for instance, evening (6–9 p.m.) was the most cited specific time slot (by 24% of
respondents, 𝑛 = 163), followed by late afternoon (3–6 p.m., 23%, 𝑛 = 158). Very few (under 5% each) used LLMs
primarily in the early morning (𝑛 = 32) or overnight hours (𝑛 = 28). As for days, weekdays slightly outranked weekends
– each weekday was cited by between 19% and 23% of participants, whereas only 11% mentioned Sundays.
2025-06-16 01:11. Page 15 of 1–32.

16

Terzimehić et al.

Fig. 7. Participants’ hourly distribution of LLM use for learning over a 24-hour period

In terms of how much time learners engage with LLMs on an average weekday, over half of LLM users (𝑛 = 356,
approximately 53%) reported spending less than 30 minutes per day using LLMs for learning. About 21% (𝑛 = 141) use
them for 30–60 minutes daily, and roughly 15% (𝑛 = 104) for 1–2 hours per day, while 11% (𝑛 = 77) are power-users
exceeding 2 hours a day.
Context. LLM learners could select one or more learning contexts in which they engage with LLMs. The results
show integrating these AI tools across a variety of learning contexts. On average, participants reported learning in 2.6
different contexts (𝑆𝐷 = 1.28), with the number of contexts per person ranging from 1 to 6 (𝑥˜ = 2). 25% of participants
selected 3 or more learning contexts.
The variety of contexts is led by Higher Education (𝑛 = 71) and the combinations of Work-Related Activities–Practical
Skills Learning– Lifelong/Hobby Learning (𝑛 = 35), and Practical Skills Learning–Lifelong/Hobby Learning (𝑛 = 32).
Across all responses, work and personal learning are both major domains: just over half of users (around 50 to 55%) use
LLMs for Lifelong/Hobby Learning (𝑛 = 367) – i.e., self-directed learning of personal interests – and a similarly high
percentage use them for Work-Related Activities (𝑛 = 365), i.e., on the job for learning or problem-solving at work. Nearly
half, 48% (𝑛 = 325), employ LLMs for Practical Skills Learning, followed by Higher Education with 47% (𝑛 = 322). Less
commonly selected contexts included Professional/Career Development (𝑛 = 231), Popular Science Education (𝑛 = 110),
K-12 Education (𝑛 = 25, probably due to our adults’ sample) and Other learning contexts, such as language learning or
health inquiries, with one participant stating “introspective activities”.
Social Setting. LLM-based learning is almost entirely an individual activity. An overwhelming 89% (𝑛 = 606) of
respondents said they primarily use LLMs for learning alone (individual learning). Only 1% (𝑛 = 8) primarily use them
in a group or collaborative setting. Another 9% (𝑛 = 64) said both individual and group use in equal measure.
Devices and Platforms. Users access LLMs through two devices on average, with smartphones and computers
dominating. Smartphones were the most commonly used device (about 69% of learners use a smartphone for LLM
access, 𝑛 = 469), closely followed by desktop PCs (60%, 𝑛 = 407) and laptops (50%, n=337). Tablets were used by a
2025-06-16 01:11. Page 16 of 1–32.

An Empirical Large-Scale Study on LLM Use in Everyday Learning

(a) LLM-learning contexts

(b) Devices to access LLMs

17

(c) Platforms to access LLMs

Fig. 8. Frequency of the mentioned a) learning contexts with LLMs b) devices to access LLMs for learning and c) platforms to access
LLMs for learning

smaller share (17%, 𝑛 = 113). As for how LLM learners access LLMs, the vast majority (about 88%, 𝑛 = 598) use standard
web-based interfaces. Over half (53%, 𝑛 = 357) also reported using mobile apps (for instance, the official ChatGPT app
or third-party client apps). Around 16% have used desktop software integrations (𝑛 = 111), and a small fraction use
browser extensions or other third-party tools (6%, 𝑛 = 42). As such, most participants are using the readily available
free interfaces, with web and mobile apps being the go-to methods of access.
4.3.3 Latent Learner Profiles. We ran a LCA that resulted in four profiles of LLM learners based on their learning
behaviors, task engagement, and digital environments. The optimal four-class solution was selected based on the
log-likelihood (maximum likelihood = –10575.98), AIC (21397.96), and BIC (21953.82). Estimated class population shares
were relatively balanced (23.8%–25.7%), and modal posterior probabilities confirmed the robustness of the solution.
The first group, Structured Knowledge Builders (23.8%), primarily engages with LLMs in higher education contexts,
with 71% using them for academic learning. Their LLM usage is focused on conceptual understanding (67%), text
generation (44%), and summarizing content (77%), indicating that they use AI tools to synthesize and deepen their
academic knowledge. While they occasionally engage in work-related activities (47%), they are less likely to rely on
LLMs for tasks such as coding or assignment clarification. This group predominantly uses laptops (80%) but also
incorporates smartphones (53%) into their learning.
In contrast, Self-Guided Explorers (26.1%) demonstrate a strong preference for informal, self-directed learning. They
are the most active in lifelong learning and hobby-related education (85%) and show high engagement in practical skills
learning (65%), whereas their use of LLMs in formal education is limited. Their primary focus is on problem-solving
(54%), seeking factual information (72%), and developing practical competencies rather than structured academic tasks.
With an overwhelming reliance on smartphones (91%), they represent a highly mobile and on-the-go learning style,
leveraging LLMs as an everyday knowledge companion.
The third profile, Analytical Problem Solvers (24.4%), is characterized by a stationary, office-based learning environment,
with nearly all members (98%) using desktop computers. They engage moderately in both higher education (45%) and
work-related activities (47%), indicating a mixed academic and professional focus. While their overall engagement with
LLMs is lower than that of other groups, they rely on AI for problem-solving (64%) more than for creative or generative
tasks. Their limited engagement in brainstorming, grammar checking, or text summarization suggests that they use
LLMs more for analytical reasoning and structured problem-solving rather than for open-ended content creation.
2025-06-16 01:11. Page 17 of 1–32.

18

Terzimehić et al.

Fig. 9. Latent Class Analysis: Survey Item Probabilities by Learner Profile: Grouped by Profile

The fourth and most versatile group, Adaptive Power Users (25.7%), demonstrates a highly integrative approach to
LLM usage. These learners are present in multiple contexts, with increased engagement in higher education (59%),
lifelong learning (69%), professional development (55%), and work-related activities (68%). Unlike the other groups, they
exhibit consistently high engagement across all major learning tasks: 84% use LLMs for brainstorming and discussion,
78% for grammar checking and text generation, 87% for explaining concepts, and 94% for summarizing content. Their
diverse learning behaviors are reflected in their device usage, where they incorporate smartphones (81%), desktops
(65%), and laptops (59%), indicating a flexible and adaptive approach to AI-assisted learning across different settings.
Whereas Academic Knowledge Builders and Analytical Problem Solvers tend to operate within more defined academic
and professional contexts, Self-Guided Explorers embrace informal learning with a mobile-first approach, and Adaptive
Power Users integrate AI tools into a wide range of learning contexts. Regarding the tasks the learners execute with
LLMs, Structured Knowledge Builders focus on content generation and conceptual learning within academic settings,
but have lower engagement in problem-solving and technical applications. Self-Guided Explorers prioritize on-demand,
self-directed learning, using LLMs for fact-checking, problem-solving, and resource exploration, but rarely for structured
assignments or academic writing. Analytical Problem Solvers employ LLMs for technical and computational tasks, with
less emphasis on brainstorming, writing, or general conceptual explanations. Adaptive Power Users, in contrast, are
highly versatile and engage in nearly all task types, making them the most comprehensive users of LLMs.
2025-06-16 01:11. Page 18 of 1–32.

An Empirical Large-Scale Study on LLM Use in Everyday Learning

19

Fig. 10. Latent Class Analysis: Survey Item Probabilities by Learner Profile: Grouped by Survey Item

RQ3 Main Findings. The timing and context data, next to the LCA, suggest that LLMs are empowering
self-directed, just-in-time and life-centric learning opportunities. Most usage is solitary and on personal
devices like smartphones and laptops, using existing platforms and interfaces to access LLMs. The fact that over
half of users have no fixed time or schedule for it might point to LLMs filling micro-learning moments throughout
day-to-day life. The dominant interaction modality remains the initial text-based manner.
LLM learners are leveraging LLMs to save time and get unstuck. Summarizing complex content, explaining
difficult concepts in simpler terms, providing quick factual answers, and brainstorming ideas are among the
top uses. Here, we observe a curious contradiction: the concern of misinformation seems not to hinder our
participants in utilizing LLMs for factual checks.
Among LLM learners, we identified four classes: Structured Knowledge Builders use LLMs mainly for academic
tasks like summarization and conceptual understanding, Self-Guided Explorers rely on mobile devices for informal,
practical learning, and Analytical Problem Solvers apply LLMs to technical problem-solving in stationary, workbased contexts. In contrast, Adaptive Power Users engage across all learning contexts and task types, showing the
most comprehensive and flexible use of LLMs.

4.4

RQ4: Perceived Learning Effects, Over-reliance and Privacy Measures

4.4.1 Perceived Learning Effects. The surveyed LLM learners shared their opinion on the extent LLMs have improved
their learning and productivity on a 4-point Likert-scale, from to a great extent to not at all. A short open-text question
2025-06-16 01:11. Page 19 of 1–32.

20

Terzimehić et al.

Fig. 11. Likert-scale distribution of LLM perceptions of over-reliance and usefulness

probed participants to explain their answer briefly. Our results indicate that LLM learners hold nuanced attitudes about
using these tools for learning. They generally recognize LLM’s benefits, whilst being somewhat mindful of risks such as
privacy and dependency, as depicted in the upper barchart in Figure 12.
88% (𝑛 = 601) of participants perceive LLMs to have improved their learning or productivity, with 177 participants
agreeing it to be to a great extent (𝑛 = 424 replying somewhat). Participants emphasized speed, convenience, instant
access, more information, new ideas, and easy understanding to be the major drivers of improved learning processes
and increased productivity.
“LLMs [help] me to find many new ideas and [give] me a lot of information that I didn’t know before. Its function is
really amazing and always available whenever I need it.” (P140)
“LLMs allowed me to navigate content in a more efficiency and simpler manner. This reduced significantly the frustration
in the learning process in some contexts - for example: being stuck understanding a certain concept because it is explained
in a complicated manner.” (P28)
“Spending time reading a book, through papers or googling around to find a semi-good answer takes so much more time
than using an LLM.” (P442)
2025-06-16 01:11. Page 20 of 1–32.

An Empirical Large-Scale Study on LLM Use in Everyday Learning

21

Fig. 12. Likert-scale distribution of LLM perceptions on productivity (above) and privacy concerns (below)

4.4.2 (Over-)Reliance on LLMs. We evaluated eight Likert-scale statements, from strongly disagree to strongly agree,
related to the over-reliance on LLMs for learning, including concerns about misinformation, usefulness, and social
impact. The descriptive results are presented in Figure 11.
Responses regarding over-reliance on LLMs and reduced critical thinking are rather on the pro-LLM side, with a
notable proportion disagreeing that LLMs hinder independent problem-solving. Similarly, concerns about diminished
social interaction due to LLM use elicit mixed responses. The majority of participants agree that LLMs provide helpful
and informative content, yet they also acknowledge that misinformation remains a challenge, requiring fact-checking.
These findings overlap with the emerged challenges listed in Section 4.2 above.
4.4.3 Privacy Attitudes. We asked participants to what extent they have privacy concerns when interacting with LLMs
on a 4-point Likert-scale from not at all to to a great extent.
We observe a low to moderate level of privacy concern, with a somewhat degree of concern (𝑛 = 306), followed by
very little (𝑛 = 235) being the majority (see Figure 12). Very few users are on the opposite sides of concerns, with similar
numbers on both: 76 participants express a concern to a great extent, whereas 61 participants bear no concern at all.
When asking whether participants incorporate specific privacy measures, the majority (𝑛 = 543) indicated that they
do not take such measures, compared to 135 participants who confirmed implementing specific privacy measures.
4.4.4 Continuance of LLM Use for Learning. Finally, we asked participants to state on a 5-point Likert scale the likelihood
of them continuing to use LLMs for learning. In line with previous positive responses, a large majority of 58% (𝑛 = 395)
consider themselves extremely likely to continue using LLMs for learning, followed by one-third (𝑛 = 224) who say
they are somewhat likely. Far fewer respondents, 4%, (𝑛 = 28) are neutral, and less than 5% combined are somewhat
unlikely (𝑛 = 16) or extremely unlikely (𝑛 = 15), as Figure 13a depicts. In a similar vein, 72% would recommend LLMs
for learning to their friends (see Figure 13b).
4.4.5 Regression Analysis. We ran a multinomial logistic regression to assess how perceptions of privacy, effectiveness,
overreliance, and demographic factors (age, gender, AI literacy, ATI score) predict latent class membership. Class Adaptive
Power Users served as the reference category. The model was statistically significant overall (𝜒2(21) = 156.4, 𝑝 < .001)
with a pseudo R2 of 0.083, indicating modest explanatory power. Perceived effectiveness of LLMs emerged as a robust
and consistent predictor across comparisons. Higher effectiveness ratings significantly decreased the likelihood of
membership in class Structured Knowledge Builders (𝛽 = −1.11, 𝑝 < .001), class Self-Guided Explorers (𝛽 = −0.72, 𝑝 < .001),
and class Analytical Problem Solvers (𝛽 = −1.06, 𝑝 < .001) compared to class of Adaptive Power Users. Similarly, more
2025-06-16 01:11. Page 21 of 1–32.

22

Terzimehić et al.

(a) Likeliness of continuance of using LLMs for learning

(b) Recommendations of LLM for learning

Fig. 13. LLM learners’ responses on a) how likely they are to continue using LLMs for learning and b) whether they would recommend
using LLMs to friends

favorable attitudes toward technology (ATI score) predicted higher odds of membership in the Class of Adaptive Power
Users over all other classes (p < .01 across comparisons). Overreliance concern negatively predicted membership to class
Self-Guided Explorers (𝛽 = −0.24, 𝑝 = .015), while age was positively associated with the same class(𝛽 = +0.038, 𝑝 = .001)
and marginally negatively associated with Class Structured Knowledge Builders(p = .095).
We extended our multinomial logistic regression to include participants’ payment status for LLM tools, in addition
to their attitudes and demographic factors. The model remained significant (𝜒2(24) = 177.2, 𝑝 < .001) and explained
nearly 10% of the variance in latent class membership (pseudo R2 = .094). Perceived effectiveness continued to strongly
predict membership in more engaged classes, with higher ratings significantly reducing the likelihood of belonging to
classes other than the comparative Class Adaptive Power Users. Technological affinity (ATI Score) and payment behavior
also emerged as consistent and meaningful predictors. In particular, participants who paid for LLMs were significantly
more likely to belong to Adaptive Power Users and less likely to be in the lower-engagement classes. Gender significantly
predicted membership to the class Analytical Problem Solvers, with male participants nearly three times as likely to
belong to that group (𝛽 = 1.07, 𝑝 < .001).

RQ4 Main Findings. Most LLM learners perceive LLMs as helpful and useful resources for improving learning
and productivity. Interestingly, LLM learners mostly disagree with the over-reliance narrative of LLMs impeding
critical thinking and meaningful social interaction. Our pool of LLM learners exhibits no privacy concerns to a
great extent. It thus comes as no surprise that the large majority indicates a strong willingness to continue using
LLMs for learning, suggesting that, into their third year of roll-out, LLMs might have become the new normal for
learning.
2025-06-16 01:11. Page 22 of 1–32.

An Empirical Large-Scale Study on LLM Use in Everyday Learning
5

23

Discussion

5.1

Widespread and Embedded Use of LLMs in Everyday Learning – with Technical Affinity as the Main
Driver of Adoption

Our survey reveals a prominent observation: 88% of our respondents reported using LLMs as part of their learning
process, be it for professional development or as voluntary academic support. This high adoption rate shows a clear shift
nearly three years after the widespread distribution of LLMs in late 2022: LLMs are no longer emerging technologies,
but rather deeply embedded tools in people’s everyday learning routines.
Yet, this broad uptake is not evenly distributed across different demographic groups in our sample. Our findings
reveal significant differences between LLM learners and non-LLM learners regarding age, gender and technical affinity
attitudes, suggesting that LLM learners tend to be younger, male and more comfortable with novel technology, which
aligns with our and similar findings [71] of curiosity and openness being the main driver of initial LLM adoption.
However, our more nuanced latent class analysis of LLM learners shows a rather equal gender distribution across
the classes of Self-guided Explorers and Analytical Power Users. In other words, once individuals begin using LLMs
for learning, the way and depth they engage with them is less strongly shaped by gender. This highlights differences
between adoption and engagement: while curiosity and tech confidence may influence who starts using LLMs, other
factors might shape how those tools are ultimately used for learning. For example, Draxler et al. [19] found the gender
gap in LLM use to be of less size in technical fields, suggesting that proper education on LLM use itself might be a
strong potential avenue to tackle the digital divide. Similarly, awareness of the benefits, but also limitations and risks of
LLMs all positively correlate with the intention to use LLMs. In other words, users possessing the knowledge on what
LLMs can do wrong does not necessarily hinder their use of LLMs[1]. Indeed, our results show that 14% of non-adopters
(𝑛 = 14, combined non-LLM users and non-LLM learners) within our participants’ pool simply do not know how
to apply LLMs to their learning, which inhibits initial adoption – despite non-significant differences in knowledge
regarding the operating mechanisms of AI (i.e., AI literacy results). This points to a gap not in theoretical knowledge,
but in practical, confidence-building exposure. To overcome this barrier, we need both real-world demonstrations
of LLMs’ educational value, as well as AI literacy programs that prioritize practical, everyday learning benefits over
technical AI capability, that are developed and approved by proven educational authorities.
5.2

Convenience over Accuracy and Privacy

Our participants identified mistrust and disinformation as the primary challenges when using LLMs for learning. LLMs
are indeed prone to producing hallucinations [35], which are errors in generated content. These can be categorized into
factual hallucinations, where the content deviates from real-world facts, and faithfulness hallucinations, where the
generated content does not align with user instructions or contains internal inconsistencies [35]. Hallucinations in LLMs
present a critical challenge for learning, as errors in generated content can often be difficult to detect, especially for novice
users [5]. Particularly over time, there is a risk of diminished critical engagement with content and an accumulation of
misconceptions. Despite this awareness, though, our findings reveal fact-checking to be the most common reported
LLM use case: 301 learners in our sample suggest using LLMs to verify information while simultaneously expressing
concerns about misinformation. This contradiction may indicate users swapping accuracy for convenience and speed in
learning, as our results demonstrate an around-the-clock, ubiquitous use of LLMs for learning.
LLMs can be convincingly wrong [67], and people are more likely to trust AI if the generated content matches
their own worldviews [66]. As LLMs begin to integrate internal fact-checking tools, such as Google’s DataGemma
2025-06-16 01:11. Page 23 of 1–32.

24

Terzimehić et al.

feature2 that allows models to verify their own responses, users may place even more trust in these systems. However,
fact-checking is not exclusive to LLMs. The widespread distribution of social media has long enabled the spread of
fake news [24]. In a study examining the consumption and trustworthiness of news on social media, Flintham et al.
[24] found their participants to rely on objective factors (e.g., source URL, journalistic style) and subjective factors
(e.g., personal interests in the topic) when judging news as fake or not. For LLMs, the first might be more difficult to
follow, given that LLMs do not name their sources and do not operate like that in the first place. The lack of transparent
sourcing can further impede users’ ability to verify information, increasing the risk of internalizing inaccuracies. Future
research should thus explore how learners recognize hallucinations and evaluate credibility, what strategies they use to
cross-check information, and how cognitive biases shape their trust in AI-generated content.
Another barrier to using LLMs is privacy, as evidenced by participants who explicitly cited data handling concerns.
Despite these concerns, though, LLM learners reported low to moderate privacy concerns, with most of them not
taking specific protective measures. Clearly, there exists a gap between users’ attitudes and their actual behavior, again
potentially suggesting the convenience of LLMs outweighs the concern over privacy. As an implication, LLM users
might benefit from interfaces that encourage more privacy-conscious use, by, e.g., detecting, highlighting, or even
anonymizing sensitive information in users’ prompts.
5.3

Disparity in Over-reliance Perceptions

Regarding learning effectiveness and overreliance on LLMs, Lepp and Kaimre [45] surveys the frequency and methods
of LLM use for learning programming skills among 231 computer science students. Their findings surprisingly reveal
that more frequent reliance on AI chatbots for programming tasks is associated with a decline in students’ performance.
In a similar vein, Stadler et al. [68] discovers LLMs to ease cognitive load, however, at the cost of depth in engaging with
learning material, compared to the use of traditional search engines. However, our findings complicate the narrative
around overreliance. Despite the functional support that LLMs offer, participants in our survey did not express a strong
sense of dependency or overreliance. Whereas the listed related works showcase that (excessive) use may correlate with
performance decline, users themselves may not perceive their reliance as problematic, as our results suggest. This raises
questions about the cause of this disparity. One possible explanation could lie in self-determination theory [16], that
claims the importance of autonomy in motivation. Users may feel in control of their learning process even when the tool
exerts a subtle influence, leading to a mismatch between perceived and actual reliance. Similarly, the Dunning-Kruger
effect [42] may play a role, where users with lower levels of expertise overestimate their ability to effectively use such
tools without unintended consequences. One possible explanation for this reliance could be cognitive biases, such as
the third-person effect [15], as a recent study on the LLM use in research writing suggests [46].
5.4

Design Implications

5.4.1 Re-think Defaults Modes of Interaction for Learning. In spite of the multimodal interaction possibilities, text-based
interaction, known as ’prompting’, remains the dominant modality of interaction with LLMs, as suggested by our
findings. This comes as no surprise, given that LLMs operate on a natural language interface basis. As such, our results
confirm previous findings that users tend to stick to default interface elements and interaction forms even when more
graphic alternatives are made available [17]. However, other media formats, when used for learning (e.g., visualizations
or audio-based dialogue), bear immense potential to enhance the learning process [41, 43, 54]. Rethinking the user
2 https://ai.google.dev/gemma/docs/datagemma

2025-06-16 01:11. Page 24 of 1–32.

An Empirical Large-Scale Study on LLM Use in Everyday Learning

25

interface of LLMs specifically for learning, to include multimodal learning materials by default, could potentially lead
to a more in-depth analysis, understanding, and learning engagement.
5.4.2 Provide Learning Materials with Credible Sources and/or Confidence Levels. As discussed above, our participants
raised concerns about the tendency of LLMs to hallucinate, yet many did not limit LLMs’ use for fact-checking. This
reliance calls for transparent source attribution by, e.g., displaying source links, indicating confidence levels, or citing
external references. Such features could support the users’ agency by promoting awareness that AI can make mistakes
and encouraging critical thinking skills for learners to question, verify, and reflect on the consumed media content.
5.4.3 Cater to Specific Types of Learning and Learners. Current LLMs interfaces for learning (and in general) follow
a one-size-fits-all approach for learning (and in general). However, our LCA uncovered four primary learner groups
with LLMs, embodying different contexts of use, tasks, and devices of engagement. The diverse profiles underscore
the contextual nature of LLM learning. This raises the question of whether adaptive interfaces could detect learner
archetypes and tailor experiences accordingly. Although personalisation has the potential to support individual needs,
there is also a risk that it could reinforce existing learning patterns and limit opportunities for growth. Rather than simply
mirroring users’ preferences, should adaptive systems gently challenge them? For example, should LLM interfaces gently
nudge Self-Guided Explorers toward more structured reflection, or support Analytical Problem Solvers in developing
creative fluency? Moreover, the mobility of learning, especially among Self-Guided Explorers, highlights a shift toward
ubiquitous, context-independent engagement with LLMs. This calls for mobile-first UI/UX optimization that potentially
includes multimodal input, micro-interactions, or session continuity [18]. These can support learning in fragmented or
informal settings, while addressing emerging needs like distraction management and coherence across short learning
bursts. The Adaptive Power Users, meanwhile, challenge one-size-fits-all design norms. As edge cases or design leaders,
they reveal what is possible when AI tools are integrated flexibly and fluently. They may serve as testbeds for advanced
features such as cross-tool integrations, longitudinal tracking, or scaffolding for complex reasoning, suggesting that we
design not for the average, but with regards to advancements across a progression trajectory.
Finally, this discussion encourages us to consider equity and outcomes. Are all learners equally positioned to become
Adaptive Power Users, or do disparities in access, confidence, or prompt literacy widen existing gaps? And how do
different usage patterns translate into actual learning gains? Does summarization encourage surface learning, while
brainstorming supports deeper cognitive engagement? Such questions raise both ethical and motivational considerations
around agency and autonomy in LLM use.
5.4.4 Empowering Learners to Become Prompt Engineers. One downside of personalization and customization features
in LLMs for specific learner profiles, which can initially support novice users, is that they may inadvertently constrain
learners’ development over time. Specifically, learners who rely heavily on automated adaptations may fail to develop
transferable prompting skills, thereby limiting their ability to generalize their use of LLMs across contexts or evolve
their interaction strategies as their expertise grows.
Our findings indicate that technical affinity, not basic AI knowledge, was a stronger predictor of learners’ adoption
of LLMs for learning. This suggests that the curiosity and willingness to experiment with new technologies, including
the iterative refinement of prompts, are critical factors in facilitating meaningful and satisfying learning experiences.
Importantly, this reinforces prior work showing that the quality of learner-generated prompts significantly affects the
relevance and instructional value of LLM responses [40, 50]. This finding is further supported by a recent systematic
review, which identifies prompt engineering as an emergent, teachable digital skill that improves student engagement
2025-06-16 01:11. Page 25 of 1–32.

26

Terzimehić et al.

and AI output quality in educational contexts [44], underscoring that prompting is not a peripheral activity but a central
determinant of learning outcomes.
Rather than treating prompting as a side activity, interaction interfaces could embed reflective prompting practices,
real-time feedback on input quality, and examples that illustrate the effects of prompt refinement within their interfaces.
Various prompt engineering frameworks, such as CRISPE [78], offer structured approaches that can be embedded into
learning interfaces to guide learners in formulating more effective interactions with LLMs. This approach, next to
enhancing learners’ agency, also aligns with broader goals of AI literacy and responsible tool use. As current practices
suggest, empowering learners to become effective prompt engineers might become essential for realizing the long-term
educational value of LLMs.
5.4.5 Support Collaborative Learning by Design. Our findings indicate that learning with LLMs is a predominantly
individual activity, with only a small share of use dedicated to group learning. Although we did not examine the details
of neither individual nor group learning sessions with LLMs, the large share already presents a limitation given the
well-established benefits of group learning. Encouraging learning mechanisms that stem from group learning, such as
pooled knowledge, reduced memory load, or observational learning [57], are thus not being leveraged at the expense of
benefits such as improved comprehension, retention, and problem solving [57].
Current mainstream LLM interfaces enable collaborative use only by sharing one account. These could be enhanced in
several ways, with some proposals already mentioned in related work. For example, Lyu et al. [50] suggest collaborative
query building, to construct and refine prompts in groups. These could be further enriched with response annotations,
along with visible traces of who made the annotations. The system itself could integrate system- and context-aware
prompts to encourage collaborative exchange (e.g., by facilitating a mediator role in learning exchanges or by making
suggestions to form discussion groups out of currently active members).
5.5

Limitations

Our sample, recruited exclusively from Germany via Prolific, may overrepresent tech-savvy, English-fluent individuals
(mean AI literacy score = 3.2, line 573), thus limiting generalizability to non-Western or less tech-exposed populations.
Cultural attitudes toward AI vary globally [27], necessitating future multi-country studies. Additionally, Prolific
participants’ familiarity with research may introduce social desirability bias, though anonymity measures mitigated
this. The use of ChatGPT for initial questionnaire design was validated through expert review and pilot testing, but
future studies could employ cognitive interviews to further ensure question clarity and relevance. In addition, in our
future work, we will expand our survey to a larger geographical pool to explore cross-cultural comparisons.
6

Conclusion

Within this paper, we present the results of an online survey with 776 people on their everyday use of LLMs for learning.
Guided by four research questions, we first examined demographic differences between the 88% of learners and 11%
of users of LLMs and those 2% who do not use LLMs at all. We then examined motivations and challenges associated
with using LLMs for everyday learning, as well as perceptions of over-reliance, privacy, and productivity among LLM
learners. Finally, we identified four types of LLM learners based on the contexts, devices, and tasks involved in using
LLMs for everyday learning, namely, Structured Knowledge Builders, Self-Guided Explorers, Analytical Problem Solvers,
and Adaptive Power Users. Our findings reveal that primarily male adults aged 25–30 are at the forefront of adopting
LLMs for self-directed learning. They use LLMs regardless of time and date in a variety of contexts and for a large span
2025-06-16 01:11. Page 26 of 1–32.

An Empirical Large-Scale Study on LLM Use in Everyday Learning

27

of tasks, with the goal to deepen their understanding, explore new subjects, and overcome traditional learning barriers.
Our results reveal a paradox: respondents use LLMs for fact-checking while being skeptical about their accuracy – with
a similar narrative for privacy. Moreover, our respondents do not perceive themselves as being overly reliant on LLMs.
We conclude with implications that emphasize the importance of including different media types for learning, enabling
collaborative learning, providing sources, and catering to specific types of learners and learning by design.
References
[1] Ghadah Al Murshidi, Galina Shulgina, Anastasiia Kapuza, and Jamie Costley. 2024. How understanding the limitations and risks of using ChatGPT
can contribute to willingness to use. Smart Learning Environments 11, 1 (2024), 36.
[2] Yazid Albadarin, Mohammed Saqr, Nicolas Pope, and Markku Tukiainen. 2024. A systematic literature review of empirical research on ChatGPT in
education. Discover Education 3, 1 (26 May 2024), 60. https://doi.org/10.1007/s44217-024-00138-2
[3] Aram Bahrini, Mohammadsadra Khamoshifar, Hossein Abbasimehr, Robert J. Riggs, Maryam Esmaeili, Rastin Mastali Majdabadkohne, and Morteza
Pasehvar. 2023. ChatGPT: Applications, Opportunities, and Threats. In 2023 Systems and Information Engineering Design Symposium (SIEDS).
274–279. https://doi.org/10.1109/SIEDS58326.2023.10137850
[4] Ryan S. Baker and Aaron Hawn. 2022. Algorithmic Bias in Education. International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education 32, 4 (01 Dec 2022),
1052–1092. https://doi.org/10.1007/s40593-021-00285-9
[5] Emily M. Bender, Timnit Gebru, Angelina McMillan-Major, and Shmargaret Shmitchell. 2021. On the Dangers of Stochastic Parrots: Can Language
Models Be Too Big?. In Proceedings of the 2021 ACM Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency (Virtual Event, Canada) (FAccT ’21).
Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 610–623. https://doi.org/10.1145/3442188.3445922
[6] Leonardo Berti, Flavio Giorgi, and Gjergji Kasneci. 2025. Emergent Abilities in Large Language Models: A Survey. arXiv:2503.05788 [cs.LG]
https://arxiv.org/abs/2503.05788
[7] Anna Bodonhelyi, Efe Bozkir, Shuo Yang, Enkelejda Kasneci, and Gjergji Kasneci. 2024. User Intent Recognition and Satisfaction with Large
Language Models: A User Study with ChatGPT. arXiv:2402.02136 [cs.HC] https://arxiv.org/abs/2402.02136
[8] Zhihui Cai, Xitao Fan, and Jianxia Du. 2017. Gender and attitudes toward technology use: A meta-analysis. Computers and Education 105 (2017),
1–13. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compedu.2016.11.003
[9] M. Callanan, C. Cervantes, and M. Loomis. 2011. Informal learning. Wiley interdisciplinary reviews. Cognitive science 2 6 (2011), 646–655.
https://doi.org/10.1002/wcs.143
[10] Christopher P. Cerasoli, G. Alliger, Jamie S. Donsbach, J. Mathieu, S. Tannenbaum, and Karin A. Orvis. 2018. Antecedents and Outcomes of Informal
Learning Behaviors: a Meta-Analysis. Journal of Business and Psychology 33 (2018), 203–230. https://doi.org/10.1007/S10869-017-9492-Y
[11] Cecilia Ka Yuk Chan and Wenxin Zhou. 2023. An expectancy value theory (EVT) based instrument for measuring student perceptions of generative
AI. Smart Learning Environments 10, 1 (2023), 64.
[12] Thomas K.F. Chiu, Qi Xia, Xinyan Zhou, Ching Sing Chai, and Miaoting Cheng. 2023. Systematic literature review on opportunities, challenges,
and future research recommendations of artificial intelligence in education. Computers and Education: Artificial Intelligence 4 (2023), 100118.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.caeai.2022.100118
[13] Fabio Clarizia, Francesco Colace, Marco Lombardi, Francesco Pascale, and Domenico Santaniello. 2018. Chatbot: An Education Support System for
Student. In Cyberspace Safety and Security, Arcangelo Castiglione, Florin Pop, Massimo Ficco, and Francesco Palmieri (Eds.). Springer International
Publishing, Cham, 291–302.
[14] Ali Darvishi, Hassan Khosravi, Shazia Sadiq, Dragan Gašević, and George Siemens. 2024. Impact of AI assistance on student agency. Computers and
Education 210 (2024), 104967. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compedu.2023.104967
[15] W. PHILLIPS DAVISON. 1983. The Third-Person Effect in Communication. Public Opinion Quarterly 47, 1 (01 1983), 1–15. https://doi.org/10.1086/
268763 arXiv:https://academic.oup.com/poq/article-pdf/47/1/1/5382397/47-1-1.pdf
[16] Edward L Deci and Richard M Ryan. 2012. Self-determination theory. Handbook of theories of social psychology 1, 20 (2012), 416–436.
[17] Isaac Dinner, Eric J Johnson, Daniel G Goldstein, and Kaiya Liu. 2011. Partitioning default effects: why people choose not to choose. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Applied 17, 4 (2011), 332.
[18] Fiona Draxler. 2023. Designing intelligent support for learning from and in everyday contexts. http://nbn-resolving.de/urn:nbn:de:bvb:19-325783
[19] Fiona Draxler, Daniel Buschek, Mikke Tavast, Perttu Hämäläinen, Albrecht Schmidt, Juhi Kulshrestha, and Robin Welsch. 2023. Gender, Age, and
Technology Education Influence the Adoption and Appropriation of LLMs. arXiv:2310.06556 [cs.CY] https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.06556
[20] Yogesh K. Dwivedi, Nir Kshetri, Laurie Hughes, Emma Louise Slade, Anand Jeyaraj, Arpan Kumar Kar, Abdullah M. Baabdullah, Alex Koohang,
Vishnupriya Raghavan, Manju Ahuja, Hanaa Albanna, Mousa Ahmad Albashrawi, Adil S. Al-Busaidi, Janarthanan Balakrishnan, Yves Barlette,
Sriparna Basu, Indranil Bose, Laurence Brooks, Dimitrios Buhalis, Lemuria Carter, Soumyadeb Chowdhury, Tom Crick, Scott W. Cunningham,
Gareth H. Davies, Robert M. Davison, Rahul Dé, Denis Dennehy, Yanqing Duan, Rameshwar Dubey, Rohita Dwivedi, John S. Edwards, Carlos Flavián,
Robin Gauld, Varun Grover, Mei-Chih Hu, Marijn Janssen, Paul Jones, Iris Junglas, Sangeeta Khorana, Sascha Kraus, Kai R. Larsen, Paul Latreille, Sven
Laumer, F. Tegwen Malik, Abbas Mardani, Marcello Mariani, Sunil Mithas, Emmanuel Mogaji, Jeretta Horn Nord, Siobhan O’Connor, Fevzi Okumus,
2025-06-16 01:11. Page 27 of 1–32.

28

Terzimehić et al.

Margherita Pagani, Neeraj Pandey, Savvas Papagiannidis, Ilias O. Pappas, Nishith Pathak, Jan Pries-Heje, Ramakrishnan Raman, Nripendra P. Rana,
Sven-Volker Rehm, Samuel Ribeiro-Navarrete, Alexander Richter, Frantz Rowe, Suprateek Sarker, Bernd Carsten Stahl, Manoj Kumar Tiwari, Wil
van der Aalst, Viswanath Venkatesh, Giampaolo Viglia, Michael Wade, Paul Walton, Jochen Wirtz, and Ryan Wright. 2023. Opinion Paper: “So what
if ChatGPT wrote it?” Multidisciplinary perspectives on opportunities, challenges and implications of generative conversational AI for research,
practice and policy. International Journal of Information Management 71 (2023), 102642. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijinfomgt.2023.102642
[21] Michael Eraut. 2004. Informal learning in the workplace. Studies in Continuing Education 26, 2 (2004), 247–273. https://doi.org/10.1080/
158037042000225245 arXiv:https://doi.org/10.1080/158037042000225245
[22] Haim Eshach. 2007. Bridging In-school and Out-of-school Learning: Formal, Non-Formal, and Informal Education. Journal of Science Education and
Technology 16, 2 (01 Apr 2007), 171–190. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10956-006-9027-1
[23] Justin R Evans, Matt Karlsven, Spencer B Perry, and R Kimmons. 2020. Informal learning. The Students’ Guide to Learning Design and Research;
Kimmons, R., Ed (2020).
[24] Martin Flintham, Christian Karner, Khaled Bachour, Helen Creswick, Neha Gupta, and Stuart Moran. 2018. Falling for Fake News: Investigating the
Consumption of News via Social Media. In Proceedings of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (Montreal QC, Canada)
(CHI ’18). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1–10. https://doi.org/10.1145/3173574.3173950
[25] Göran Folkestad. 2006. Formal and informal learning situations or practices vs formal and informal ways of learning. British Journal of Music
Education 23, 2 (2006), 135–145. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0265051706006887
[26] Tim Fütterer, Christian Fischer, Anastasiia Alekseeva, Xiaobin Chen, Tamara Tate, Mark Warschauer, and Peter Gerjets. 2023. ChatGPT in education:
global reactions to AI innovations. Scientific Reports 13, 1 (15 Sep 2023), 15310. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-023-42227-6
[27] Xiao Ge, Chunchen Xu, Daigo Misaki, Hazel Rose Markus, and Jeanne L Tsai. 2024. How Culture Shapes What People Want From AI. In Proceedings
of the 2024 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (Honolulu, HI, USA) (CHI ’24). Association for Computing Machinery, New York,
NY, USA, Article 95, 15 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3613904.3642660
[28] Simone Grassini. 2023. Shaping the Future of Education: Exploring the Potential and Consequences of AI and ChatGPT in Educational Settings.
Education Sciences 13, 7 (2023). https://doi.org/10.3390/educsci13070692
[29] Reza Hadi Mogavi, Chao Deng, Justin Juho Kim, Pengyuan Zhou, Young D. Kwon, Ahmed Hosny Saleh Metwally, Ahmed Tlili, Simone Bassanelli,
Antonio Bucchiarone, Sujit Gujar, Lennart E. Nacke, and Pan Hui. 2024. ChatGPT in education: A blessing or a curse? A qualitative study exploring
early adopters’ utilization and perceptions. Computers in Human Behavior: Artificial Humans 2, 1 (2024), 100027. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chbah.
2023.100027
[30] Juho Hamari, Nicolai Hanner, and Jonna Koivisto. 2017. Service quality explains why people use freemium services but not if they go premium: An
empirical study in free-to-play games. Int. J. Inf. Manag. 37 (2017), 1449–1459. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijinfomgt.2016.09.004
[31] Juho Hamari, Nicolai Hanner, and Jonna Koivisto. 2020. "Why pay premium in freemium services?" A study on perceived value, continued use and
purchase intentions in free-to-play games. International Journal of Information Management 51 (2020), 102040. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijinfomgt.
2019.102040
[32] Muhammad Hamdan. 2023. The Impact of ChatGPT on Students: Positive Effects and Potential Negative Effects — moderndiplomacy.eu. https:
//moderndiplomacy.eu/2023/03/14/the-impact-of-chatgpt-on-students-positive-effects-and-potential-negative-effects/. [Accessed 04-04-2025].
[33] Marie Hornberger, Arne Bewersdorff, and Claudia Nerdel. 2023. What do university students know about Artificial Intelligence? Development and
validation of an AI literacy test. Computers and Education: Artificial Intelligence 5 (2023), 100165. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.caeai.2023.100165
[34] Mohammad Hosseini, Catherine A Gao, David M Liebovitz, Alexandre M Carvalho, Faraz S Ahmad, Yuan Luo, Ngan MacDonald, Kristi L Holmes,
and Abel Kho. 2023. An exploratory survey about using ChatGPT in education, healthcare, and research. Plos one 18, 10 (2023), e0292216.
[35] Lei Huang, Weijiang Yu, Weitao Ma, Weihong Zhong, Zhangyin Feng, Haotian Wang, Qianglong Chen, Weihua Peng, Xiaocheng Feng, Bing Qin,
and Ting Liu. 2025. A Survey on Hallucination in Large Language Models: Principles, Taxonomy, Challenges, and Open Questions. ACM Trans. Inf.
Syst. 43, 2, Article 42 (Jan. 2025), 55 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3703155
[36] Maurice Jakesch, Zana Buçinca, Saleema Amershi, and Alexandra Olteanu. 2022. How Different Groups Prioritize Ethical Values for Responsible AI.
In Proceedings of the 2022 ACM Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency (Seoul, Republic of Korea) (FAccT ’22). Association for
Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 310–323. https://doi.org/10.1145/3531146.3533097
[37] Celina Kacperski, Denis Bonnay, Juhi Kulshrestha, Peter Selb, Andreas Spitz, and Roberto Ulloa. 2024. Characteristics of ChatGPT users from
Germany: implications for the digital divide from web tracking data. arXiv:2309.02142 [cs.CY] https://arxiv.org/abs/2309.02142
[38] Enkelejda Kasneci, Kathrin Seßler, Stefan Küchemann, Maria Bannert, Daryna Dementieva, Frank Fischer, Urs Gasser, Georg Groh, Stephan
Günnemann, Eyke Hüllermeier, et al. 2023. ChatGPT for good? On opportunities and challenges of large language models for education. Learning
and individual differences 103 (2023), 102274.
[39] E. Kasthuri and S. Balaji. 2021. A Chatbot for Changing Lifestyle in Education. In 2021 Third International Conference on Intelligent Communication
Technologies and Virtual Mobile Networks (ICICV). 1317–1322. https://doi.org/10.1109/ICICV50876.2021.9388633
[40] Nils Knoth, Antonia Tolzin, Andreas Janson, and Jan Marco Leimeister. 2024. AI literacy and its implications for prompt engineering strategies.
Computers and Education: Artificial Intelligence 6 (2024), 100225. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.caeai.2024.100225
[41] Robert B Kozma. 1991. Learning with media. Review of educational research 61, 2 (1991), 179–211.
[42] Justin Kruger and David Dunning. 1999. Unskilled and unaware of it: how difficulties in recognizing one’s own incompetence lead to inflated
self-assessments. Journal of personality and social psychology 77, 6 (1999), 1121.
2025-06-16 01:11. Page 28 of 1–32.

An Empirical Large-Scale Study on LLM Use in Everyday Learning

29

[43] Ka Hei Carrie Lau, Bhada Yun, Samuel Saruba, Efe Bozkir, and Enkelejda Kasneci. 2024. Wrapped in Anansi’s Web: Unweaving the Impacts of
Generative-AI Personalization and VR Immersion in Oral Storytelling. arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.16894 (2024).
[44] Daniel Lee and Edward Palmer. 2025. Prompt engineering in higher education: a systematic review to help inform curricula. International Journal of
Educational Technology in Higher Education 22, 1 (2025), 7.
[45] Marina Lepp and Joosep Kaimre. 2025. Does generative AI help in learning programming: Students’ perceptions, reported use and relation to
performance. Computers in Human Behavior Reports 18 (2025), 100642. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chbr.2025.100642
[46] Zhehui Liao, Maria Antoniak, Inyoung Cheong, Evie Yu-Yen Cheng, Ai-Heng Lee, Kyle Lo, Joseph Chee Chang, and Amy X. Zhang. 2024. LLMs as
Research Tools: A Large Scale Survey of Researchers’ Usage and Perceptions. arXiv:2411.05025 [cs.CL] https://arxiv.org/abs/2411.05025
[47] Xi Lin. 2024. Exploring the Role of ChatGPT as a Facilitator for Motivating Self-Directed Learning Among Adult Learners. Adult Learning 35, 3
(2024), 156–166. https://doi.org/10.1177/10451595231184928 arXiv:https://doi.org/10.1177/10451595231184928
[48] Xinru Lin and Luyang Li. 2025. Implicit Bias in LLMs: A Survey. arXiv:2503.02776 [cs.CL] https://arxiv.org/abs/2503.02776
[49] D. W. LIVINGSTONE. 2006. INFORMAL LEARNING: CONCEPTUAL DISTINCTIONS AND PRELIMINARY FINDINGS. Counterpoints 249 (2006),
203–227. http://www.jstor.org/stable/42979596
[50] Wenhan Lyu, Yimeng Wang, Tingting (Rachel) Chung, Yifan Sun, and Yixuan Zhang. 2024. Evaluating the Effectiveness of LLMs in Introductory
Computer Science Education: A Semester-Long Field Study. In Proceedings of the Eleventh ACM Conference on Learning @ Scale (Atlanta, GA, USA)
(L@S ’24). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 63–74. https://doi.org/10.1145/3657604.3662036
[51] Janice Malcolm, Phil Hodkinson, and Helen Colley. 2003. The interrelationships between informal and formal learning. Journal of workplace
learning 15, 7/8 (2003), 313–318.
[52] Amelia Manuti, Serafina Pastore, Anna Fausta Scardigno, Maria Luisa Giancaspro, and Daniele Morciano. 2015. Formal and informal learning in the
workplace: A research review. International journal of training and development 19, 1 (2015), 1–17.
[53] Victoria J. Marsick and Marie Volpe. 1999. The Nature and Need for Informal Learning. Advances in Developing Human Resources 1, 3 (1999), 1–9.
https://doi.org/10.1177/152342239900100302 arXiv:https://doi.org/10.1177/152342239900100302
[54] Richard E. Mayer. 2009. Multimedia Learning (2 ed.). Cambridge University Press.
[55] Meredith Ringel Morris. 2023. Scientists’ Perspectives on the Potential for Generative AI in their Fields. arXiv:2304.01420 [cs.CY] https:
//arxiv.org/abs/2304.01420
[56] Ahnaf Chowdhury Niloy, Md Ashraful Bari, Jakia Sultana, Rup Chowdhury, Fareha Meem Raisa, Afsana Islam, Saadman Mahmud, Iffat Jahan,
Moumita Sarkar, Salma Akter, Nurunnahar Nishat, Muslima Afroz, Amit Sen, Tasnem Islam, Mehedi Hasan Tareq, and Md Amjad Hossen. 2024.
Why do students use ChatGPT? Answering through a triangulation approach. Computers and Education: Artificial Intelligence 6 (2024), 100208.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.caeai.2024.100208
[57] Timothy J Nokes-Malach, J Elizabeth Richey, and Soniya Gadgil. 2015. When is it better to learn together? Insights from research on collaborative
learning. Educational Psychology Review 27 (2015), 645–656.
[58] Rock Yuren Pang, Hope Schroeder, Kynnedy Simone Smith, Solon Barocas, Ziang Xiao, Emily Tseng, and Danielle Bragg. 2025. Understanding
the LLM-ification of CHI: Unpacking the Impact of LLMs at CHI through a Systematic Literature Review. arXiv:2501.12557 [cs.HC] https:
//arxiv.org/abs/2501.12557
[59] Minju Park, Sojung Kim, Seunghyun Lee, Soonwoo Kwon, and Kyuseok Kim. 2024. Empowering Personalized Learning through a Conversation-based
Tutoring System with Student Modeling. In Extended Abstracts of the CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (Honolulu, HI, USA)
(CHI EA ’24). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article 123, 10 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3613905.3651122
[60] Nermin Punar Özçelik and Gonca Yangın Ekşi. 2024. Cultivating writing skills: the role of ChatGPT as a learning assistant—a case study. Smart
Learning Environments 11, 1 (18 Mar 2024), 10. https://doi.org/10.1186/s40561-024-00296-8
[61] Yao Qu, Michelle Xin Yi Tan, and Jue Wang. 2024. Disciplinary differences in undergraduate students’ engagement with generative artificial
intelligence. Smart Learning Environments 11, 1 (2024), 51.
[62] Beatrice Rammstedt and Oliver P. John. 2007. Measuring personality in one minute or less: A 10-item short version of the Big Five Inventory in
English and German. Journal of Research in Personality 41, 1 (2007), 203–212. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jrp.2006.02.001
[63] B. Rogoff, M. Callanan, Kris D. Gutiérrez, and F. Erickson. 2016. The Organization of Informal Learning. Review of Research in Education 40 (2016),
356 – 401. https://doi.org/10.3102/0091732X16680994
[64] Daniel Schugurensky. 2000. The forms of informal learning: Towards a conceptualization of the field.
[65] Kathrin Seßler, Tao Xiang, Lukas Bogenrieder, and Enkelejda Kasneci. 2023. PEER: empowering writing with large language models. In European
conference on technology enhanced learning. Springer, 755–761.
[66] Farhana Shahid, Srujana Kamath, Annie Sidotam, Vivian Jiang, Alexa Batino, and Aditya Vashistha. 2022. ”It Matches My Worldview”: Examining
Perceptions and Attitudes Around Fake Videos. In Proceedings of the 2022 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (New Orleans,
LA, USA) (CHI ’22). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article 255, 15 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3491102.3517646
[67] Marita Skjuve, Asbjørn Følstad, and Petter Bae Brandtzaeg. 2023. The User Experience of ChatGPT: Findings from a Questionnaire Study of
Early Users. In Proceedings of the 5th International Conference on Conversational User Interfaces (Eindhoven, Netherlands) (CUI ’23). Association for
Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article 2, 10 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3571884.3597144
[68] Matthias Stadler, Maria Bannert, and Michael Sailer. 2024. Cognitive ease at a cost: LLMs reduce mental effort but compromise depth in student
scientific inquiry. Computers in Human Behavior 160 (2024), 108386. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chb.2024.108386
2025-06-16 01:11. Page 29 of 1–32.

30

Terzimehić et al.

[69] Jan-Philipp Stein, Tanja Messingschlager, Timo Gnambs, Fabian Hutmacher, and Markus Appel. 2024. Attitudes towards AI: measurement and
associations with personality. Scientific Reports 14, 1 (05 Feb 2024), 2909. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-024-53335-2
[70] Ana Stojanov, Qian Liu, and Joyce Hwee Ling Koh. 2024. University students’ self-reported reliance on ChatGPT for learning: A latent profile
analysis. Computers and Education: Artificial Intelligence 6 (2024), 100243. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.caeai.2024.100243
[71] Artur Strzelecki. 2024. To use or not to use ChatGPT in higher education? A study of students’ acceptance and use of technology. Interactive
learning environments 32, 9 (2024), 5142–5155.
[72] Jérémie Sublime and Ilaria Renna. 2024. Is ChatGPT Massively Used by Students Nowadays? A Survey on the Use of Large Language Models such
as ChatGPT in Educational Settings. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.17486 (2024).
[73] European Social Survey. 2025. ESS Data Portal | European Social Survey 2025. https://doi.org/10.21338/ess5e03_5
[74] Christiane Attig Thomas Franke and Daniel Wessel. 2019. A Personal Resource for Technology Interaction: Development and Validation of the
Affinity for Technology Interaction (ATI) Scale. International Journal of Human–Computer Interaction 35, 6 (2019), 456–467. https://doi.org/10.1080/
10447318.2018.1456150
[75] Chandan Kumar Tiwari, Mohd Abass Bhat, Shagufta Tariq Khan, Rajaswaminathan Subramaniam, and Mohammad Atif Irshad Khan. 2024. What
drives students toward ChatGPT? An investigation of the factors influencing adoption and usage of ChatGPT. Interactive Technology and Smart
Education 21, 3 (2024), 333–355.
[76] Ahmed Tlili, Boulus Shehata, Michael Agyemang Adarkwah, Aras Bozkurt, Daniel T. Hickey, Ronghuai Huang, and Brighter Agyemang. 2023.
What if the devil is my guardian angel: ChatGPT as a case study of using chatbots in education. Smart Learning Environments 10, 1 (22 Feb 2023), 15.
https://doi.org/10.1186/s40561-023-00237-x
[77] Chaoran Wang, Zixi Li, and Curtis Bonk. 2024. Understanding self-directed learning in AI-Assisted writing: A mixed methods study of postsecondary
learners. Computers and Education: Artificial Intelligence 6 (2024), 100247. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.caeai.2024.100247
[78] Mo Wang, Minjuan Wang, Xin Xu, Lanqing Yang, Dunbo Cai, and Minghao Yin. 2024. Unleashing ChatGPT’s Power: A Case Study on Optimizing
Information Retrieval in Flipped Classrooms via Prompt Engineering. IEEE Transactions on Learning Technologies 17 (2024), 629–641. https:
//doi.org/10.1109/TLT.2023.3324714
[79] Yuxia Wang, Minghan Wang, Muhammad Arslan Manzoor, Fei Liu, Georgi Georgiev, Rocktim Jyoti Das, and Preslav Nakov. 2024. Factuality of
Large Language Models: A Survey. arXiv:2402.02420 [cs.CL] https://arxiv.org/abs/2402.02420
[80] Ruben Weijers, Gabrielle Fidelis de Castilho, Jean-François Godbout, Reihaneh Rabbany, and Kellin Pelrine. 2024. Quantifying learning-style
adaptation in effectiveness of LLM teaching. In Proceedings of the 1st Workshop on Personalization of Generative AI Systems (PERSONALIZE 2024),
Ameet Deshpande, EunJeong Hwang, Vishvak Murahari, Joon Sung Park, Diyi Yang, Ashish Sabharwal, Karthik Narasimhan, and Ashwin Kalyan
(Eds.). Association for Computational Linguistics, St. Julians, Malta, 112–118. https://aclanthology.org/2024.personalize-1.10/

A

Demographics

Table 1. Age Distribution

Group
All
Non-LLM Users
Non-LLM Learners
LLM Learners

Count

Mean

Std. Dev.

Min

Median

Max

776
15
83
678

31.56
35.00
34.93
31.07

9.87
11.06
11.34
9.57

18
22
19
18

29
36
33
29

72
61
68
72

Table 2. Gender Breakdown (%)

Group

Male

Female

Non-binary

Prefer not to say

Self-describe

All
Non-LLM Users
Non-LLM Learners
LLM Learners

49.9%
26.7%
30.1%
52.8%

48.5%
66.7%
63.9%
46.2%

1.0%
6.7%
4.8%
0.4%

0.5%
0%
0%
0.6%

0.1%
0%
1.2%
0%

2025-06-16 01:11. Page 30 of 1–32.

An Empirical Large-Scale Study on LLM Use in Everyday Learning

31

Table 3. Education Level Distribution (%)

Group
All
Non-LLM Users
Non-LLM Learners
LLM Learners

Bachelors

Graduate Degree

Some University

Completed Secondary

32.2%
33.3%
31.3%
32.3%

24.9%
6.7%
30.1%
24.6%

17.3%
13.3%
16.9%
17.4%

13.4%
13.3%
10.8%
13.7%

Table 4. Household Income Distribution (%)

Group

<25K

25K–50K

50K–100K

100K–200K

>200K

Prefer not to say

All
Non-LLM Users
Non-LLM Learners
LLM Learners

27.4%
40.0%
30.1%
26.9%

26.7%
46.7%
25.3%
26.4%

29.1%
6.7%
27.7%
29.8%

9.2%
0%
4.8%
9.9%

0.4%
0%
0%
0.4%

7.2%
6.7%
12.0%
6.6%

Table 5. AI Literacy Scores

Group
All
Non-LLM Users
Non-LLM Learners
LLM Learners

Count

Mean

Std. Dev.

Min

25%

Median

Max

776
15
83
678

3.06
2.87
3.22
3.04

1.25
0.92
1.36
1.24

0.00
1.00
0.00
0.00

2.00
2.00
2.00
2.00

3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00

5.00
4.00
5.00
5.00

Table 6. ATI Scale

B

Group

Mean

Std. Dev.

Cronbach’s Alpha

All
Non-LLM Users
Non-LLM Learners
LLM Learners

3.97
3.25
3.57
4.04

0.88
1.01
0.98
0.84

0.90
0.93
0.93
0.90

LCA Model Fit by Number of Classes

2025-06-16 01:11. Page 31 of 1–32.

32

Terzimehić et al.
Table 7. Personality Traits (Mean Scores)

Group
All
Non-LLM Users
Non-LLM Learners
LLM Learners

C

Extraversion

Agreeableness

Conscientiousness

Neuroticism

Openness

2.85
2.50
2.70
2.87

3.65
3.29
3.73
3.65

3.42
3.57
3.33
3.43

2.92
3.53
3.08
2.89

3.60
3.57
3.73
3.58

Descriptive Statistics of Resulting LCA Classes
Table 8. Age Distribution Descriptive Statistics

Statistic

Structured Knowledge Builders

Self-Guided Explorers

Analytical Problem Solvers

Adaptive Power Users

Count
Mean
Median
Std. Dev.
Min
Max

155.00
28.54
27.00
8.15
18.00
64.00

180.00
33.99
31.00
10.82
18.00
72.00

167.00
31.20
29.00
9.48
18.00
68.00

176.00
30.18
28.00
8.69
18.00
59.00

Table 9. Gender Distribution Counts by Segment

Gender

Structured Knowledge Builders

Self-Guided Explorers

Analytical Problem Solvers

Adaptive Power Users

98
56
0
1

93
87
0
0

43
120
2
2

79
95
1
1

Female
Male
Non-binary
Prefer not to say

Table 10. AI Literacy Descriptive Statistics

Statistic

Structured Knowledge Builders

Self-Guided Explorers

Analytical Problem Solvers

Adaptive Power Users

Count
Mean
Std. Dev.

155.00
2.95
1.26

180.00
2.96
1.35

167.00
3.17
1.18

176.00
3.07
1.15

2025-06-16 01:11. Page 32 of 1–32.

